
RAD File / Dossier de la SAR : TC0-09076
Private Proceeding / Huis clos
Reasons and decision ? Motifs et décision
Person who is the subject of the appeal
XXXX XXXX XXXX
Personne en cause
Appeal considered / heard at
Ottawa, ON
Appel instruit / entendu à
Date of decision
April 30, 2021
Date de la décision
Panel
Cédric Marin
Tribunal
Counsel for the person who is the subject of the appeal
Josephat Nwabuokei
Conseil de la personne en cause
Designated representative
N/A
Représentant(e) désigné(e)
Counsel for the Minister
N/A
Conseil du ministre
REASONS FOR DECISION
OVERVIEW
[1] The Appellant, XXXX XXXX XXXX, is a citizen of Nigeria. He alleges to be persecuted due to his diverse sexual orientation as a gay man.
[2] The Refugee Protection Division (RPD) found that the Appellant was not credible since he provided a vague testimony about his relationship with another man and there were contradictions about being caught with him. The RPD rejected his claim.
[3] The Appellant requests that the Refugee Appeal Division (RAD) set aside the decision of the RPD and accept the claim for refugee protection. In the alternative, they request that the matter be remitted to the RPD for redetermination.
[4] I dismiss the appeal. I find that the Appellant is not credible on a balance of probability. The RPD was correct in finding that the Appellant is neither a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection. I confirm the decision of the RPD.
ANALYSIS
[5] The determinative issue is credibility. The Appellant has not submitted new evidence and he is not requesting a hearing.
Vague testimony about his relationship
The Appellant provided a vague testimony on his same-sex relationship
[6] The RPD found that the Appellant was not credible about his relationship with XXXX, another man. The RPD found that the Appellant could not provide a timeline of his relationship and he was vague about his partner, such as what he liked about him and what they did together.1
[7] The Appellant submits that the RPD erred in finding that he was unable to recall details of past events.
[8] I disagree. The Appellant provided repetitive and non-descriptive statements regarding his same-sex relationship. For example, the Appellant was unable to recall the timeline of his relationship. He testified that they dated for some months in 2017, but he did not know when they started to date. As another example, when asked why the Appellant loved his partner, the Appellant stated that he loved him since he is attracted to him and he had sexual thoughts about each other.
[9] The RPD warned the Appellant that his testimony was repetitive, lacking specific details and verbatim to his narrative. The RPD encouraged the Appellant to provide more details. However, his vague testimony continued. The Appellant continued to repeat himself. He did not provide specific details about why he loved or why he was attracted to his partner, other than stating he loved him. Questioned for more details, the Appellant stated that they would play soccer and study together. He did not provide any further testimony on how he spent time with his partner or what he liked about his partner. When asked if he knew anything else about his partner, he stated that he could not remember other things. Overall, the Appellant's testimony was vague.
The RPD correctly applied the Chairperson's Guideline 9 on SOGIE
[10] The Appellant submits that the RPD failed to meaningfully engage with the Chairperson's Guideline 9: Proceedings Before the IRB Involving Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity and Expression (the Chairperson's Guideline 9 on SOGIE). In particular, he argues that the RPD did not assess his social, cultural and psychological conditions before making a negative credibility finding. I disagree with the Appellant.
[11] I accept that individuals may be reluctant, uncomfortable or hesitant to provide details regarding their relationship with other individuals who have a diverse sexual orientation, having considered the nature of the allegations and the Chairperson's Guideline 9 on SOGIE. I further accept that individuals with diverse sexual orientations may face challenges in establishing their diverse sexual orientation. In some situations, these individuals may have experienced trauma or lived in a repressive society. The determination of a claim must be made having assessed all the evidence, including the Appellant's testimony, written statements and documentary evidence.
[12] In my view, the RPD correctly applied the Chairperson's Guideline 9, both during the hearing and in making its decisions.
[13] During the hearing, the RPD adjusted their line of questioning to take into consideration the Chairperson's Guideline 9, and the sensitive nature of the Appellant's allegations. The RPD focused their questions of the awareness and understanding of the Appellant's sexual orientation differences in Nigeria and his relationships with other men. Of note, the RPD asked open-ended questions to allow the Appellant and followed up when necessary to elicit more information and gather information in order to make a decision. These questions are not aimed at love, sexuality or intimate preferences, nor were they aimed at the trauma or hardship experienced. In addition, the RPD granted breaks as requested by the Appellant and encouraged the Appellant to take his time to properly present his claim.
[14] In making its decision, the RPD accepted that the Appellant lived in a country where individuals with a diverse sexual orientation live in a generalized climate of fear and self-censorship, and this may have presented a psychological barrier. It could have impacted his ability to testify. In this case, I note that this was the Appellant's first and only same-sex relationship in Nigeria, and this would have been significant in a country like Nigeria. I accept that the relationship would have been meaningful and important to the Appellant for these same reasons. As noted at paragraph 7.6.1 of the Chairperson's Guideline 9 on SOGIE, testimony about same-sex relationships that is vague and lacking in detail may support a negative credibility inference after examining any cultural, psychological or other barriers. There is a certain minimum or reasonable testimony that is expected when asked spontaneous, open-ended questions about memorable experiences or special occasions, having considered the depth and nature of the relationship, the claimant's personal experience and Chairperson's Guideline 9 on SOGIE.
The RPD correctly assessed the Appellant's mental health and clinical psychologist report
[15] The clinical psychologist found that the Appellant's pattern of distress was internally inconsistent, and it raised questions about the validity of the information provided by the Appellant to the clinical psychologist. Due to these issues, the clinical psychologist concluded that it was not possible to establish a definitive diagnosis. The report2 by the clinical psychologist is silent on the Appellant's memory or ability to recall information, as the RPD correctly pointed out.3
[16] The Appellant submits that the RPD failed to question and assess the Appellant's mental, psychological and cognitive functions. I disagree. The Appellant has the burden to establish that his mental, psychological or cognitive functions impair his ability to testify or present his claim. The evidence presented by the Appellant does not establish this on a balance of probability. The clinical psychological report indicates that the Appellant was inconsistent, and the report's findings are inconclusive. Questioned by the RPD on these findings, the Appellant explained that the report was mostly yes or no questions. His explanation contradicts the report, which indicates that the Appellant provided numerous, detailed statements to the psychologist. Hence, the Appellant has not established that his mental health or other impeded his ability to present his claim. As noted above, the RPD properly considered the Appellant's psychological barriers in regard to the Chairperson's Guideline 9 on SOGIE.
The Appellant's vague testimony about his relationship undermines his credibility
[17] In light of the Chairperson's Guideline 9 on SOGIE and the Appellant's mental health, I find that the Appellant provided a vague testimony about his same-sex relationship. When cautioned that he was being vague and encouraged to give more details, the Appellant's limited, non-descriptive and repetitive statements continued. I draw a negative credibility finding.
Inconsistent statements about being caught with his partner
[18] The RPD found that the Appellant was inconsistent regarding being caught with his partner. The Appellant stated that he was caught kissing his partner in a hostel corridor at school and he was suspended from school. He initially did not know when he was suspended, and later stated it happens in XXXX 2017. He testified that he returned since there was only a few weeks, but he wrote in his Basis of Claim that he returned to school since there were a few months left. The RPD noted that the Appellant previously testified to having graduated in XXXX 2017. Confronted, the Appellant explained that he needed to return to school to complete projects in XXXX.
[19] The RPD did not accept the Appellant's explanation since these were significant discrepancies in his timeline and it did not accept that he would graduate with outstanding work to be completed. The RPD found that this raised a doubt on the events of being caught with his partner and his subsequent suspension from school. The RPD drew a negative credibility finding.
[20] The Appellant submits that the RPD made general statements of contradictions, which are not supported by the evidence. However, he does not provide specific statements on this finding by the RPD.
[21] I disagree with the Appellant. It is reasonable to expect that the Appellant would provide consistent statements regarding the consequences of being caught with his partner. His testimony contradicts his written statements. I do not accept his explanation that, on a balance of probability, the Appellant would have been able to graduate if there was outstanding schoolwork or projects to be completed. I agree with the RPD that the contradiction undermines his allegations that he was caught with his partner and subsequently suspended from school.
The other findings by the RPD are correct
The documents provided do not establish his diverse sexual orientation or overcome the credibility concerns
[22] The RPD found that, even if they gave the documents full weight, the statements about the Appellant's sexual orientation does not overcome the substantial credibility concerns. The Appellant submits that the RPD erred in assessing the documentary evidence provided by the Appellant. I disagree with the Appellant. The documents provided does not establish the Appellant's diverse sexual orientation or overcome the credibility concerns.
[23] The Appellant submitted photos of him and his alleged partner.4 I accept that the photos show the Appellant with another man. The Appellant submitted a letter from XXXX XXXX,5 an agency that serves individuals with diverse sexual orientations. I accept that the Appellant completed various courses and he is part of a peer-driven support group, as indicated in the letter. However, on a balance of probability, these documents do not establish his diverse sexual orientation. I place more weight on the Appellant's testimony and written statements than the photos and the letter by a third party, XXXX XXXX.
[24] The Appellant provided an affidavit from his uncle XXXX XXXX XXXX.6 In his affidavit, the uncle recounts what he was told by the Appellant. I accept that his uncle helped the Appellant leave Nigeria. However, I place more weight on the Appellant's testimony and written statements than the uncle's reiteration of statements provided by the Appellant (i.e. he told me that he was threatened, he told me the ordeal he suffered at school). The letter from the uncle repeats allegations presented by the Appellant. The Appellant had a meaningful opportunity to present his claim and testify to the RPD.
[25] The Appellant provided an affidavit from his mother, whereby she indicates that the police is looking for the Appellant since he is gay. This is also stated in the uncle's affidavit. According to the Appellant's allegations, the police was informed by students at his school that he was gay. When students saw him kissing his partner in the hallway, students threatened to kill the Appellant if he did not pose with a naked boy and performed sexual acts while they took pictures. The students provided this picture to the police.
[26] On a balance of probability, I find that the Appellant has not established a diverse sexual orientation. The Appellant provided a vague testimony about his relationship with another man and contradicting statements about the consequences of being found with his partner. Although his mother and uncle stated that the police are looking for him due to his sexual orientation, I place more weight on the Appellant's own testimony and written statements regarding his own sexual orientation and lived experiences. I reach the same conclusion as the RPD.
The RPD correctly assessed the claim under sections 96 and 97
[27] The RPD found that the Appellant was not credible on a balance of probability. As a result, the RPD rejected the claim under sections 96 and 97. The Appellant submits that the RPD has to evaluate sections 96 and 97 even if the Appellant is not credible. He argues that the RPD erred by failing to evaluate the Appellant's personalized risk.
[28] I disagree with the Appellant. The Appellant has not established a prospective risk of any harm. Hence, the claim fails under section 96 or 97. You cannot have a well-founded fear of persecution or a personalized risk if the Appellant has not established a harm.
CONCLUSION
[29] I dismiss the appeal. I find that the Appellant is not credible on a balance of probability. The RPD was correct in finding that the Appellant is neither a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection. I confirm the decision of the RPD.
(signed)
Cédric Marin
Cédric Marin
April 30, 2021
Date
1 RPD-1, RPD Record, RPD decision at paras. 9 to 12.
2 RPD-1, RPD Record at p. 187.
3 RPD-1, RPD Record, RPD decision at paragraph 10.
4 RPD-1, RPD Record at p. 175.
5 RPD-1, RPD Record at p. 178.
6 RPD-1, RPD Record at p. 180.
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
RAD File / Dossier de la SAR : TC0-09076
RAD.25.02 (January, 2020)
Disponible en français
2
Immigration and Refugee
Board of Canada
Refugee Appeal Division
Commission de l'immigration
et du statut de réfugié du Canada
Section d'appel des réfugiés
RAD.25.02 (January, 2020)
Disponible en français
