Immigration and Refugee
Board of Canada
Refugee Appeal Division
Commission de l'immigration
et du statut de réfugié du Canada
Section d'appel des réfugiés
RAD File / Dossier de la SAR : VB7-07363
Private Proceeding / Huis clos
Reasons and decision ? Motifs et décision
Person(s) who is(are) the subject of the appeal
XXXX XXXX
Personne(s) en cause
Appeal considered / heard at
Vancouver, BC
Appel instruit / entendu à
Date of decision
November 16, 2018
Date de la décision
Panel
Paula Faber
Tribunal
Counsel for the person(s) who is(are) the subject of the appeal
Brenda Yuen
Barrister and Solicitor
Conseil(s) (de la/des)
personne(s) en cause
Designated representative
N/A
Représentant(e) désigné(e)
Counsel for the Minister
N/A
Conseil du ministre
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
[1] XXXX XXXX (Appellant) a citizen of Sierra Leone, appeals a decision of the Refugee Protection Division (RPD), dated November 27, 2017, rejecting her claim for refugee protection.
[2] The Appellant was self-represented before the RPD. She is represented by legal counsel on appeal.
[3] A representative of the Minister of Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada intervened at the RPD, but has filed no notice of intervention in this matter before the RAD.
[4] The Appellant seeks to present new evidence pursuant to section 110(4) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA).1 The Appellant is requesting that the appeal be allowed and that she is found to be a Convention2 Refugee or a person in need of protection or that the matter be referred to the RPD for re-determination.
DETERMINATION
[5] The appeal is allowed. Pursuant to section 111(1)(b) of the IRPA, the RAD sets aside the determination of the RPD and substitutes its own determination that the appellant is a Convention refugee.
BACKGROUND
[6] The Appellant's story is detailed in her Basis of Claim form (BOC)3 narrative which was expanded upon during her RPD hearing. The Appellant was born on XXXX XXXX, 1992. After her father died in XXXX 2015, the Appellant and her husband moved to the village of Magburuka, so her husband could take over her father's role as XXXX of the XXXX.
[7] The Appellant worked with women in the community teaching them about the negative effects of female genital mutilation (FGM).
[8] In XXXX 2016, the Appellant was beaten by a group of Bondo women; members of a secret society, who came to her home. She was subjected to FGM against her will and held captive because additional cermonies needed to take place.
[9] The Appellant managed to escape and her husband took her for medical treatment. Some of the Bondo women came to her house and ordered the Appellant to return to finish the ceremonies or be killed. Her husband reported the incident to the police, but nothing was done. The Appellant and her husband escaped to Guinea after their house and XXXX were set on fire.
[10] They received help from a missionary in Guinea who helped the Appellant and her husband obtain visas for Brazil. They travelled there in XXXX 2016, and the Appellant applied for asylum. Due to difficult living conditions and a language barrier, the Appellant and her husband received visas for Canada on XXXX XXXX, 2017. She arrived in Canada in XXXX 2017, and made her claim for refugee protection in July, 2017. Her husband did not make a refugee claim and returned to Sierra Leone.
[11] A representative of the Minister of Immigration, Refugees and Citizenhip Canada filed a notice of intervention on October 2, 2017, along with detailed submissions indicating that Exclusion 1E and Crediblity issues were being raised.
[12] The hearing before the RPD took place by way of video conference on November 17, 2017, with the Appellant appearing in Sakatoon, the Minister's Representative in Vancouver, and the RPD Member in Calgary.
RPD's REASONS
* The RPD found that the Appellant is excluded of refugee protection by section E of Article 1 of the Refugee Convention.4
* The RPD determined that the Appellant did not need refugee protection because she had refugee status in Brazil.
APPELLANT'S ARGUMENTS
* The RPD erred in the treatment of the evidence and the way in which findings of fact were made.
* The RPD erred in applying Article 1E.
* The RPD erred in its credibility assessment.
ROLE OF THE RAD
[13] When reviewing the RPD decision, the RAD is required to independently determine whether the RPD was correct in relation to each alleged error of law, fact, or mixed fact and law. The RAD may defer to the RPD's credibility assessment of the oral testimony if it finds that the RPD had a meaningful advantage in the circumstances.
[14] The credibility findings of the RPD relate to the substance of the testimony and not to behavioural or other issues that the RPD could observe during the hearing but the RAD could not. For these reasons, I do not find that the credibility findings are owed deference and therefore the standard of correctness applies.
Admissibility of New Evidence
[15] The Appellant submitted the following documents as new evidence with her Appeal Record on February 28, 2018:
* Translation of Foreigner Provisional Identity Document Protocol (Documento Provisorio)
* Affidavit of Appellant, February 27, 2018
[16] Subsection 110(4) of the IRPA provides that the person who is the subject of the appeal may present only evidence that arose after the rejection of their claim or that was not reasonably available, or that the person could not reasonably have been expected in the circumstances to have presented at the time of the rejection of their refugee claim.
Item 1 - Foreigner Provisional Identity Document
[17] There were many questions regarding this document during the RPD hearing. This is a document that was disclosed by the Appellant, but not translated as requried. Both the RPD and the Minister's Representative made specific requests to the Appellant to have the document translated prior to the hearing. The Appellant explained that she does not speak Portuguese and
did not know how to get it translated in advance of the the hearing. The RPD did not accept the explanation as reasonable, and found that the document was likely her refugee permit, and not simply a temporary permit as alleged.
[18] The Appellant explained how she called the Minister's Counsel for help in finding a translator. The Minister's Counsel referred her to the RPD office in Vancouver. The RPD
employee to whom she spoke said that they would send her a website with more information. Her testimony was that she never received this website information. She also explained that she asked the person she was living with for help in finding a translator, but he refused to help.
[19] While the Appellant has explained that English is her second language, and she did not understand about the translation being requried to prove her status in Brazil, I find that the RPD Rules are clear -- documents upon which a refugee claimant wants to rely must be translated into English or French.5 The importance of this document should have been made even more clear to the Appellant given that both the RPD and the Minister's Representative requested its translation.
[20] The translation of this document is not accepted as new evidence as it was reasonably available at the time of the rejection of the claim.
Item 2 - Affidavit of Appellant
[21] This affidavit was sworn February 27, 2018. However, I find that it provides information that is already known and contained in the record and therefore did not arise after the rejection of the claim. As well, it provides an explanation for deficiencies in the hearing. This document does not meet the required elements of subsection 110(4) of IRPA and is therefore not admissible as new evidence.
ANALYSIS
Did the RPD err in applying Article 1E?
[22] Section E of Article 1 provides that the Refugee Convention shall not apply to a person who is recognized by the competent authorities of the country in which he has taken residence as having the rights and obligations which are attached to the possession of the nationality of that country.
[23] For this ground of exclusion to apply, the person must have taken up residence in a country outside the country of his or her nationality and have been recognized as having the rights and obligations which are attached to the possession of nationality of that country, such as the right to return, to work, to study and to have full acces to social services.6
[24] In its decision, the RPD found that the Appellant was recognized as a refugee in Brazil and therefore enjoyed nearly all the same rights as a citizen.
[25] I find that the RPD erred in its findings of fact and that exclusion under Article 1 E is not supported by the evidence.
[26] The Appellant has argued that her status in Brazil was temporary and that she had not been given refugee protection. She says that an asylum claim was made and she was issued an identity document, but she did not particiate in a refugee interview, determination hearing or any other process. She testified that the missionary who helped her travel to Brazil, completed and submitted the paperwork initiating her refugee claim in Brazil.
[27] The Minister's Representative submitted that the Appellant was granted protections and similar to the rights and obligations as those attached to nationality in Brazil. The Minister's
Representative also submitted that the Appellant had not provided any evidence to demonstrate that she no longer has status in Brazil, and that the Minister had adduced prima facie evidence that section E of Article 1 of the Refugee Convention applies.
[28] The evidence provided by the Minister's Representative, included objective documents regarding Brazil's refugee system. These documents indicate that Brazil has the model refugee protection system in Latin America and it is party to the International Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 , and to its 1967 Protocol.7
[29] Among this objective evidence is a more detailed report on refugee law and protection in Brazil.8 This report describes the process of refugee status determination in Brazil. It indicates that the first step is a deposition from the applicant to the Federal Police which is entered into the Declaration Term:
The Declaration Term serves as the proof of the legal status of the person seeking refuge in Brazil and is their first documentation in the country. Following this, the applicant is directed to a Refugee Centre operated by either CASP or CARJ. At the Refugee Centre a more detailed questionnaire must be completed. This questionnaire is used by CASP and CARJ in asking the Brazilian Government to grant the applicant another document: the Provisional Protocol (Protocolo Provisorio). According to Article 21 of the Refugee Act the Provisional Protocol is provided by the Federal Police after CONARE (Comite Nacional para os Refugiados) gives its authorization, is valid for 90 days, and is renewed for as long as the refugee status determination process continues, as it is the applicant's identity card in Brazil.9
[30] I find on a balance of probabilities that the provisional protocol identity document described above is the untranslated document (Protocolo Provisorio) presented by the Appellant to the RPD. The objective evidence supports the Appellant's testimony that the refugee determination process had been initiated, however, the report goes on to describe several more steps in the determination process, including two interviews that must take place --the first interview is with a lawyer who is trained and paid for by UNHCR the second interview is with a representative from CONARE.
[31] The Appellant testified that in the 5 months that she was in Brazil, she was never interviewed and never spoke to any authorities regarding her refugee claim. The report indicates that after the CONARE interview, an opinion either granting or refusing refugee status is made which is sent to the CONARE plenary where it is discussed and the official decision is made:
In the case of a positive decision, the refugee must register with the Federal Police and will receive official documentation as a refugee --the official document is called the National Register of Foreigners (Registro Nacional de Estrageiros, RNE) and it proves that the refugee may lawfully reside permanently in Brazil due to his/her status as a refugee. The possession of an RNE based on refugee status for over six years enables the refugee to change his/her legal status in Brazil by requesting to become a permanent foreign resident.10
[32] I find that the Appellant's testimony and the objective evidence establish, on a balance of probabilities, that in the short time that she was there, she did not have or obtain refugee status in Brazil. The evidence shows that the Appellant made a claim and had certain limited rights as a claimant, however, she did not have refugee protection and was not a permanent resident in Brazil. I therefore find that the Appellant did not enjoy status in Brazil that is substantially similar to that of its nationals, and Article 1E does not apply.
Is the Appellant a Convention Refugee or a person in need of protection?
[33] In its decision, the RPD did not consider the inclusion aspect of the claim as it was not necessary to do having excluded the Appellant of refugee protection.
[34] While the RPD decision may not have addressed the Appellant's circumstances in Sierra Leone, I have reviewed the record, including the BOC and the hearing transcript, and have made my own independent assessment of the evidence. Even though inclusion was not considered in the decision, I find that the issue was fully canvassed by the RPD at the hearing.
[35] In coming to a decision I have considered the Guidelines on Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-Related Persecution.11 I find that there is sufficient credible or trustworthy evidence to determine that the Appellant faces a serious possiblity of persecution if she is to return to Sierra Leone.
[36] The Appellant has argued that English is not her first language and that she had difficulties understanding some of the questions asked. I have reviewed the transcript and I do not find that the Appellant had difficulties comprehending questions and responded to them in a spontaneous and detailed manner. While there may have been some requests to clarify questions, this is not unusual in refugee determination hearings, and in this case was more likely related to technological issues connected to the three-way video conference hearing.
[37] Sworn testimony is presumed to be true, and while I accept some of the concerns raised by the Minister's representative in submissions before the RPD and concerns outlined by the RPD in its decision, I find that overall, the Appellant's allegation on the central element of the claim as outlined in her BOC and in testimony is credible and is supported by the objective documentation. The focus of the Minister's credibility concerns in written submissions before the RPD relate to the failure of the Appellant's husband to claim refugee protection and return to Sierra Leone. The Appellant addressed this in testimony explaining that she was the one with the problem, not her husband.
[38] The Appeallant testified that she moved from Freetown to Maboka in XXXX 2016 after her father died so her husband could take over his XXXX. She was asked why she was targeted by the Bondo Society women and she responded that she was talking to the ladies about coming to XXXX. She also spoke to women about not taking part in genital mutilation and other societal issues such as early marriage. She testified that she was making an impact in the lives of the ladies in the community, and this made her a target. She explained that the reason she remains a target is because the Bondo Society has not completed the FGM ceremonies that they began on her.
Objective Basis
[39] The Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 states the following:
The law does not prohibit Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C) for women and girls. UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) data from 2014, the most recent available, reported that nine of 10 women and girls had undergone the procedure. As a result of the statutory lapse of the Ebola state of emergency measures on August 7, suspension of activities, including FGM/C, by the "bondo" and other secret societies was no longer in force. Beginning in January there were again reports FGM/C was being perpetrated. In July the Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender, and Children's Affairs signed a memorandum of understanding with the Soweis and other traditional leaders who practice FGM/C, whereby the traditional leaders committed not to initiate minors under 18 years of age. The FSU reported that of six recorded cases of FGM/C during initiation of girls under 18 years of age between January and August, four were investigated, but no charges were filed. A renewed call to end the practice began following international attention to the death of 19-year-old Fatmata Turay after she underwent FGM/C.12
[40] The Human Rights Committee Report entitled, Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Sierra Leone, described FGM as a harmful traditional practice that should be eradicated.13
[41] More information is available in a Response to Information Request,14 which states:
In a 2014 report on FGM in Sierra Leone, Too Many, a "values-based charity working to end FGM states that "[p]ersecution for fighting FGM in Freetown remains prevalent, despite wide-spread anti-FGM campaigning". Khadijah Bangura, in her article in the New Citizen, indicates that campaigns against FGM have resulted in the unlawful arrest of activists, photographers and volunteers and that "traditional leaders" and police use "excessive force against community human right[s] groups". According to the same source, as a result, volunteers, photographers and staff have fled the country looking for protection overseas. Too Many similarly indicates that anti-FGM activists face many challenges, including death threats, and as a result "a number of activists have left Sierra Leone."
Internal Flight Alternative and State Protection
[42] The issues of Internal Flight Alternative (IFA) and state protection were identified at the beginning of the hearing.
[43] The Appellant testified that her husband went to the police in Sierra Leone twice, but they were not helped. She testified that the first time was when her husband reported the Appellant missing. The police said they would help, but instead did nothing. The second time he was told by a police superintendent that they would not be believed anywhere in the country because the Bondo society is powerful and many police officers are involved. I find that the Appellant's testimony is supported by the ojective documents which describe the prevalance of FGM in Sierra Leone and the reported unlawful arrest of activists and others speaking out against the practice.
[44] Amnesty International reports that police accountablity in the country was limited.15
[45] A summary from the Afrobarometer report from June 2016 states that: "Fourteen years after the end of its civil war, Sierra Leone continues to struggle with weak governance, widespread poverty, and systemic corruption that undermine efforts toward sustainable development." Among the report's key findings are that 70% of Sierra Leoneans say the level of corruption in the country increased and a majority of respondents still say "most" or "all" police
officials are corrupt - the highest level of perceived corruption among public institutions.16
[46] The Country Report on Human Rights Practices17 for 2016 states that:
The most significant human rights problems included unlawful killing and abusive treatment by police, prolonged detention and imprisonment under harsh and life- threatening conditions, and widespread official corruption in all branches of government.
[47] For similar reasons, I find that a viable IFA does not exist for the Appellant. According to the World Factbook, the country is slightly smaller than the state of South Caroline in size.18 Given the objective evidence which describes endemic corruption, a lack of police support, the persecution of FGM activists and the targetting of the Appellant by the Bondo Society, I find that she faces a serious possiblity of persecution throughout Sierra Leone.
CONCLUSION
[48] The RAD finds that the RPD erred in excluding the Appellant under section E of Article 1 of the Refugee Convention.
[49] With respect to inclusion, the RAD has conducted its own independent analysis after reviewing the entirety of the record and finds that the Appellant has established that she will face a serious possiblity of persecution if she is to return to Sierra Leone. The appeal is allowed.
[50] Pursuant to section 111(1)(b) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA), the RAD sets aside the determination of the RPD and substitutes its own determination that the appellant is a Convention refugee.
(signed)
"Paula Faber"
Paula Faber
November 16, 2018
Date
1 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27.
2 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees: Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, "Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status", under the 1951 Convention.
3 RPD Record (RPDR), p. 10-21.
4 Article 1E of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
This Convention shall not apply to a person who is recognized by the competent authorities of the country in which he has taken residence as having the rights and obligations which are attached to the possession of the nationality of that country.
5 Refugee Protection Division Rules (SOR/2012-256), Rules 11 and 32(1).
6 Shamlou v. Canada, 32 Imm.L.R. (2d) 135 (F.C.T.D.).
7 RPDR, p. 72-73.
8 RPDR, p. 84-106.
9 RPDR, p. 34.
10 RPDR, p. 98.
11 Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, Guidelines Issued by the Chairperson Pursuant to Section 65(3) of the Immigration Act: Guideline 4 - Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-Related Persecution, Effective date: 13 November 1996.
12 RPD Record, National Documentation Package (NDP) for Sierra Leone, 31 March 2017, item 2.1: Sierra Leone. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016. United States. Department of State. 3 March 2017.
13 RPD Record, NDP, item 2.5: Concluding Observations on the Initial Report of Sierra Leone. United Nations. Human Rights Committee. 17 April 2014. CCPR/C/SLE/CO/1.
14 RPD Record, NDP item 5.4,Response to Information Request (RIR)SLE105275.E., Information on Sisters United Against Female Genital Mutilation and Sisters United Against Female Circumcision in Freetown (2011-August 2015). Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada. 24 August 2015..
15 RPD Record, NDP item 2.2: Sierra Leone. Amnesty International Report 2015/16: The State of the World's Human Rights. Amnesty International. 2016.
16 RPD Record, NDP, item 4.4, In Sierra Leone, perceived corruption rises, public trust and leaders' job approval drop. Afrobarometer. Lena Thompson. 29 June 2016.
17 RPD Record, NDP, item 2.1: Sierra Leone. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016. United States. Department of State. 3 March 2017.
18 RPD Record, NDP, Item 1.4: Sierra Leone. The World Factbook. United States. Central Intelligence Agency. 12 December 2016.
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
RAD File / Dossier de la SAR : VB7-07363
RAD.25.02 (September 18, 2018)
Disponible en français
13
RAD.25.02 (September 18, 2018)
Disponible en français
