Immigration and
Refugee Board of Canada
Refugee Appeal Division
Commission de l'immigration
et du statut de réfugié du Canada
Section d'appel des réfugiés
RAD File No. / N° de dossier de la SAR : MB4-00848
Private Proceeding / Huis clos
Reasons and decision ? Motifs et décision
Person who is the subject of the appeal
XXXX XXXX XXXX
Personne en cause
Appeal considered / heard at
Montréal, Quebec
Appel instruit à
Date of decision
May 1, 2014
Date de la décision
Panel
Me Alain Bissonnette
Tribunal
Counsel for the person who is the subject of the appeal
Marie-José Blain
Conseil de la personne en cause
Counsel for the Minister
Farah Merali
Conseil du ministre
REASONS AND DECISION
I. INTRODUCTION
[1] XXXX XXXX XXXX, the appellant, a citizen of India, is appealing against a decision of the Refugee Protection Division (RPD), alleging that the RPD committed errors in its assessment of his credibility and in its analysis of the internal flight alternative (IFA) in Mumbai or Delhi.
II. DETERMINATION OF THE APPEAL
[2] Pursuant to subsection 111(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA), the Refugee Appeal Division (RAD) allows the appeal, sets aside the RPD determination and refers the matter to a differently constituted RPD panel for re-determination of the refugee protection claim.
III. BACKGROUND
A. Basis of the claim
[3] In his Basis of Claim Form (BOC Form), which he signed on November 22, 2013, the appellant stated that he is a citizen of India, that he was born on XXXX XXXX XXXX 1970, that he speaks Punjabi and Hindi, and that his wife, three daughters and two brothers were living in India and a brother was living in Italy at that time.1
[4] In his BOC Form, the appellant included the following narrative:
In XXXX 1987, police force caught me and my father when we were sleeping. Actually police raided to catch XXXX XXXX, because police blamed my brother for robbery while he was on bail. Police were harassing my brother and he stopped attending the court date. He feared from the police that he may be encountered by the police. When police did not find my brother, they took me and my father. They covered our eyes and took us to unknown place.
The police bet me very badly and hit on my back. I was young at that time, so I did not realize the flaws XXXX, but slowly I started having problem in my back. The police kept me and my father separately after beating hardly they filled fare car against me and my father at village XXXX XXXX near XXXX in District Amritsar. Police wrote in our file, that I and my father, were collecting money for arm and ammunition in order to make XXXX and exciting people to create XXXX and rent us to prison. Even after rending us to prison, police went every day to our home to investigate about me. My family told the police "you have taken him" the police visited my house about one month. Police believed that I came back home. They were planning to put me again in prison under false allegation. If I had come out of the prison after 15 days the police could have caught me again and could have rent me to the prison again.
In those days, the police used to remain at the gate of the prison if they catch the same person from the front door of the prison. Then they put 3/4 case on that person, with that kind of case there is no bail for attempt six months. During that time I stayed in prison for about five months and came out of the prison with help of lawyer on the basis of release order. Then I went to XXXX XXXX to join my brother who was doing XXXX work over there.
So then I never stayed in my house in Punjab. I went to Punjab just to attend the Court date because I feared from the police. When police could not find me in my house, they took my brother and he returned to home after giving them money.
In 1988, I was release from the false case.
In 1989, I came from XXXX XXXX, but I never stayed in my home but somebody informed the police that I came in Punjab but they arrested my father and brother. So then my family introduced me to the police after that the police released my father and brother. Then police tried to put false allegations against me that I had a pistol. But my relatives paid money to police within 3 days and got me released from prison. The police had order from their senior that they can get promotion by making false cases as much as possible. Because my name was in police list, that why police harassed my family.
In 1991, I visited my relatives in XXXX and police caught me from the market and police had beaten me but by the effort of my relatives I was released. It was not unusual thing for the police to catch XXXX XXXX XXXX in 1991 in in the City of XXXX the bomb was blasted in market and police caught me in connection of that bomb blast and had beaten and tried to put case against me. Because someone from my brother in law's family, was a DSP and with his help the police released me.
From 1992-1995 I served in XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX police became I had problem in my back bone due to the police torture I left my job.
In 1996 I went to XXXX XXXX and I returned in 1997, but I never stayed with my family because police was threatening my family.
In 1998, I started working in XXXX XXXX and in XXXX the police caught me again and they had beaten me and asked about my brother. But I was not aware of his where about because my parents had debarred him of their property so no one was having connection with him. My family paid money in order to get me released.
In 2000, my brother was killed in a road accident and the police informed that he died in accident. Even after his death police was harassing us. Although I had operation from my back bone and doctor fixed steel rod with my back.
In 2001 police caught me to do some investigation and threatened me and tried to put false cases on me on the request of my mother, to the SSP, they released me. After the death of my brother police tried to involve me in false case and police were asking me that I and my brother had connection with which group.
In 2002, I started working for XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX. I visited different places for XXXX purpose and collected some money for poor children. I rarely visited my house and never stayed there during the night because police were disturbing my family.
In 2005, police raided my home and arrested me while I was sick, so my neighbour and influential person of my area brought me back home. Whenever new police officer was transferred in my area and opened my file and investigated my case.
Even we submitted the death certificate of my brother and by showing my release order, I was not safe anywhere in India, so I have no faith in police. Once police planned to take me out of the prison and covered my eyes to take me some where about 11pm but at that time, one prisoner ran away from the prison.
Therefore, they could not do so, I was not alone and usually police used to take four to five persons out of prison to do false encounter, and next day with the help of my lawyer I was released from prison.
During 2006-2007, I visited Maharahtra Bihar, Punjab and Delhi for XXXX XXXX. I was always scared from the police.
In 2008, when I was going for job, police arrested me for investigation and tried to put false case on me. But the group helped me in getting out after one day because my family had informed my work place.
In 2009, police again arrested me and investigated and I told them that I was released from case. Then police threatened that they would kill me and my family. They forced me to tell I had any connection with any group and harassed me. After two days my family paid some money to get me released.
In XXXX 2011, police came to my house and threatened me and my family and tried to take me, then family and neighbour requested police and then I left my home and stayed with my relatives and passed my time.
In XXXX 2012, I went to Italy. My family still fear from the police although I am out of Country. My wife is suffering from XXXX, she has some problem in breath due to virus and she is under treatment and my family is not safe.2
B. RPD decision
[5] The hearing before the RPD was held on January 10, 2014. In its decision dated February 5, 2014, the RPD concluded that the appellant, then referred to as the claimant, had established his identity, but it rejected his claim for refugee protection after having found that he had an IFA in Mumbai or Delhi.3
C. Grounds of appeal and remedy sought
[6] In his memorandum, the appellant argues that the RPD committed errors in its assessment of his credibility and in its analysis of the IFA in Mumbai or Delhi.4
[7] For these reasons, the appellant is requesting that the RAD set aside the RPD determination and grant him refugee status.5
IV. HEARING BEFORE THE RAD
A. No new evidence was presented by the appellant on appeal
[8] In his memorandum, the appellant did not indicate that he was presenting any new evidence as set out in subsection 110(4) of the IRPA. He did, however, indicate that the RAD must analyze the evidence presented to it and draw its own conclusions.6
B. The appellant did not request a hearing before the RAD
[9] In his memorandum, the appellant did not request a new hearing before the RAD.
C. No cause to hold a RAD hearing
[10] Consequently, there is no cause to hold a hearing.
V. WHAT DEFERENCE IS DUE AND WHAT STANDARDS OF REVIEW SHOULD BE APPLIED IN THE APPEAL PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE RAD?
[11] In his memorandum, the appellant submits that the RAD has jurisdiction to hear de novo appeals, that it must analyze the evidence presented to it and draw its own conclusions, and that it owes no particular deference to the RPD.7
[12] With all due respect for this view, I am of the opinion that it must not be followed. In the following paragraphs, I will analyze the particular context of the RPD and the RAD, and what I think can be inferred from the few legal decisions that address these issues.
A. The particular context of the RPD and the RAD
[13] The RAD is not a court of law, and it does not review RPD decisions, but rather hears appeals in an administrative and non-judicial context. The RPD and the RAD are both part of the Immigration and Refugee Board (IRB), but they are two distinct divisions.8 Sections 162 to 169 of the IRPA contain the provisions that apply to them both, particularly that each "has, in respect of proceedings brought before it under this Act, sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine all questions of law and fact, including questions of jurisdiction";9 that the members of both divisions have the powers and authority of a commissioner and may do anything they consider necessary to provide a full and proper hearing;10 and that hearings before both divisions are held in the absence of the public, although each may conduct a proceeding in public, taking any other measure that it considers necessary to ensure confidentiality.11 Sections 169.1 to 170.2 of the IRPA are specific to the RPD, while sections 171 to 171.1 are specific to the RAD.
[14] In their respective roles, the RPD and the RAD must deal with whether or not to grant refugee protection to persons who make a claim. They are therefore part of the Canadian refugee protection system under the IRPA, which governs them and whose objectives include establishing fair and efficient procedures that will maintain the integrity of the system, while upholding Canada's respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all human beings.12
[15] The primary role of the RPD is to hold hearings in order to determine whether refugee protection claimants are "Convention refugees" or "persons in need of protection." In disposing of a claim by holding a hearing, the RPD has the opportunity to see and to question refugee protection claimants, which gives it a significant advantage with respect to making findings of fact and assessing the credibility of claimants.
[16] Pursuant to subsection 110(1) of the IRPA, a person or the Minister may appeal, on a question of law, of fact or of mixed law and fact, to the RAD against a decision of the RPD to allow or reject the person's claim for refugee protection. However, pursuant to subsection 110(3) of the IRPA, the RAD generally proceeds without a hearing, on the basis of the RPD record of proceedings. In order for a hearing to be held before the RAD, new evidence must be deemed admissible. In addition, the RAD must be of the opinion that this evidence raises a serious issue with respect to the credibility of the person who is the subject of the appeal, is central to the decision with respect to the refugee protection claim, and would justify allowing or rejecting the refugee protection claim.13 In other words, there are significant differences between the RPD and the RAD.
B. Right of appeal and deference to RPD decisions
[17] I would now like to refer to the concepts developed by the Alberta Court of Appeal in two decisions. These decisions do not relate directly to the IRPA, which governs the RPD and the RAD, and, consequently, do not serve as precedents that must be followed as such in this context. However, I am of the opinion that they can provide some teachings, not only with respect to the issue of whether an appeal before the RAD is an appeal de novo, but also with respect to the standards of review to be applied in this appeal.
[18] When analyzing the respective roles of two administrative tribunals and deciding which standard of review the Law Enforcement Review Board should apply in determining an appeal against a decision made by an officer tasked with hearing a complaint about a police officer's conduct, the Alberta Court of Appeal noted that the mere presence of a right of appeal-including within an administrative structure-in no way means that no deference to the first-level decision-maker is called for.14
[19] In its decision, the Court of Appeal referred to the example of the relationship established between a trial judge and an appeal judge:
The presumption underlying the structure of our court system is that a trial judge is competent to decide the case before him or her, and that a just and fair outcome will result from the trial process. Frequent and unlimited appeals would undermine this presumption and weaken public confidence in the trial process. An appeal is the exception rather than the rule.15
[20] In citing the Supreme Court of Canada, the Court of Appeal was emphasizing the importance of promoting the autonomy of the trial process and its integrity, adding that the same principle applies within administrative structures:
The same principle applies to the hearings before the presiding officers. If the Board was to continue to routinely rehear all matters on a de novo basis, and to extend no deference whatsoever to the decisions of the presiding officers, that would only undermine the apparent integrity of those hearings. As previously stated, that is inconsistent with the hybrid scheme of the Act. As the appellant noted, that approach undermines those hearings to the point that they become almost academic, and call into question the need of the interested parties to even participate in them. The hearing would be reduced to a type of preliminary inquiry.16
[21] Having considered the respective roles of the decision-makers, their particular expertise and the general economy of the proceedings, the Alberta Court of Appeal identified which standards of review the Law Enforcement Review Board should apply to decisions rendered by first-level decision-makers:
[82] In conclusion, the decision of the Board to conduct a de novo hearing, and to assume that it owed no deference to the findings of the presiding officer was in error. The role of the Board is primarily to sit on appeal from the presiding officer. The Board is not a tribunal of first instance, and cannot simply ignore the proceedings before the presiding officer, and the conclusions reached by him. The focus of the appeal to the Board should be on its dual mandate of civilian oversight, and the correction of unreasonable results.
[83] There is no general power to hold a de novo hearing in every case, and no requirement that a de novo hearing be held unless the parties consent to proceeding otherwise. Where a sufficient reason is shown or the issues on appeal warrant it, the Board has the power to admit fresh evidence. When sufficient cause is shown the Board can even rehear key evidence presented to the presiding officer.
[84] The Board has a legitimate role to play in providing civilian oversight to the system of police discipline where oversight issues arise. The Board is not bound by the inferences and conclusions of the presiding officer, but it should be able to offer some articulable reason based in law, fact or policy when it interferes with a decision under appeal. The Board should proceed primarily from the record created by the hearing before the presiding officer. It should extend deference to the decision of the presiding officer on questions of fact, credibility, and technical policing issues. If the decision of the presiding officer was reasonable, the Board should not substitute its own view just because it might have come to a different conclusion. Where the appeal raises issues of acceptability of particular police conduct, or the integrity of the discipline process, the Board's mandate is more robust.17
[22] In a more recent decision, also rendered by the Alberta Court of Appeal, the Honourable Justice Slatter indicated that the standards of review identified in Newton could vary according to the issue at hand.18
[23] In decisions of interest rendered by the Quebec Court of Appeal, this very issue of the standards of review to be applied by an appellate jurisdiction that is itself part of an administrative tribunal was analyzed, but in a different legislative context from ours. I note from these two decisions that it is paramount to [translation] "carefully scrutinize the applicable legislation to determine the limits of the intervention framework that each decision-maker, at each decision-making level, was assigned by the legislator."19 I am also alert to the argument that an appeal before an appellate jurisdiction that is part of an administrative tribunal should not be equated to a kind of judicial review,20 but I also note that even that type of appeal has its intrinsic limitations and that it does not necessarily constitute a new proceeding.21
[24] Overall, I am of the opinion that, except for strict questions of law that may include questions of interpreting the IRPA, which governs the RPD and the RAD, and except for questions of natural justice, it is appropriate for RAD members to extend deference to RPD decisions. This deference is, in fact, comparable to, although distinct from, the deference to be given by courts of law to first-level decision-makers where the issue is a question of fact or a question of mixed law and fact. In my opinion, it follows that, except in exceptional circumstances, which are not present in this case, an appeal heard by the RAD does not constitute an appeal de novo.
[25] That being said, the Federal Court should soon be able to enlighten us on the issue of what standards of review must be applied in appeals heard by the RAD against decisions rendered by the RPD. At that point, it will no longer be necessary to refer to the RAD context or to decisions rendered in cases involving legislation other than that which governs the relationship between the RPD and the RAD. However, for the moment, I am of the opinion that it is necessary to proceed as I have done in the paragraphs above, knowing that this situation is temporary and that the standard of review analysis does not need to be conducted in all cases.22
C. Standard of review to be applied in this case
[26] In his memorandum, the appellant argues that the RPD erred in its assessment of his credibility and in its analysis of the IFA in Mumbai or Delhi, in particular because it did not take into account the evidence in this regard.23
[27] The assessment of the appellant's credibility is a question of fact and, consequently, the standard of review in this appeal is reasonableness.24 When reviewing a decision on the standard of reasonableness, the analysis must be concerned with the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process, as well as with whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law.25
[28] Since the IFA question is determinative in the present case, I will focus my analysis on this question.
VI. ANALYSIS OF THE MERITS OF THE APPEAL
Did the RPD err in its assessment of the evidence concerning the IFA?
[29] I have concluded that the RPD committed an unreasonable error in its assessment of the evidence concerning the IFA and that its determination in this regard does not fall within a range of acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law. Here is why.
[30] In his memorandum, the appellant indicates that the RPD found that he feared the police in Punjab and that he would face a serious possibility of persecution if he returned to this region. He indicates that, as a result, the entire decision hinges on the appellant having an IFA. On this point, he basically criticizes the RPD for concluding that an IFA exists without having considered the documentary evidence in this regard.26
[31] In my opinion, in its reasons for decision, the RPD implied that the determinative issue in the present case was the IFA in Mumbai or Delhi:
[41] After assessing all the evidence, including the personal situation of the claimant, the Tribunal arrived at the conclusion that if the claimant really feared of being persecuted in India, he would have sough (sic) to regularize his situation and asked for asylum in Italy or in France by contacting the authorities of those countries. He made no effort to do so, according to his testimony and his conduct after he left India.
[42] From the lack of urgency on the part of the claimant to regularize his situation nearly two years after he left the country in which he allegedly claimed he feared to return, the Tribunal concluded that the claimant showed an absence of both objective and subjective fear of returning to India.
[43] However, since the Tribunal had concluded that the claimant may nevertheless face a possibility of persecution by the police in Punjab, we will assess the possibility of an IFA elsewhere in India, namely Mumbai or Delhi.27
[32] As for the IFA in Mumbai or Delhi, here is the RPD's rationale:
[48] According to the Tribunal, if the claimant relocates in Delhi or in Mumbai, he would not be found by the police there, since he has no particular profile, such as a politician or journalist or even as a suspected terrorist that would warrant the effort by the Punjab police to find him everywhere in India.
[49] Regarding registration, the documentary evidence indicated that it is not mandatory in Mumbai or Delhi and the police in India do not have the equipment to track an individual wanted by a police in another province or district.
[50] The Tribunal concluded that the claimant would not be found and persecuted in Mumbai or Delhi by the Punjab police.
[52] In regard of the second step, the claimant has ten years schooling and had traveled previously in India, He alleged that he is handicapped and provided a document28, dated 2006, which indicated that he had a XXXX percent physical disability. The claimant travelled to Italy, in 2012, where he worked XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX, according to his testimony.
[52] After taking into consideration all these facts, the Tribunal still concludes that it would not be unreasonable for this claimant to relocate in Mumbai or Delhi and resume his life if he was to return to India.29
[33] In my opinion, my role in this appeal is not to reweigh the evidence30 or to conduct a microscopic examination of the RPD's decision. Rather, my role is to evaluate whether or not the RPD committed an error and to determine whether, when analyzed as a whole, the RPD's finding that the appellant's allegations are not credible falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law.31 I note that, according to the Federal Court case law, the RPD's findings affecting issues of credibility and the assessment of evidence are entitled to great deference in the context of a judicial review.32 I am of the opinion that the RAD must extend deference to the RPD's findings concerning issues of credibility and the assessment of evidence in the context of this administrative appeal process.
[34] As part of its demanding duties, the RPD must assess all the evidence presented before it. That being said, the RPD is presumed to have considered all of the evidence before it and the failure to mention a specific piece of evidence does not amount to a failure to consider it.33 The RPD can also reach a different conclusion based on evidence that seemingly or actually runs counter to its conclusion, but in such cases it must demonstrate that it was fully aware of this evidence-in other words, that it considered it, but arrived at a different conclusion.34 On the other hand, relying on a generic analysis of a country's conditions and thereby failing to consider key elements of the evidence cannot be found to be reasonable, unless at the very least the IRB indicates why it discounted this evidence.35
[35] In its reasons for decision, the RPD determined, but without specifying any document that it might have consulted in this regard, that the documentary evidence indicates that there is no requirement to register in Mumbai or Delhi.36 The documentary evidence states that police verification occurs in all states in India and is required for tenants renting homes.37 Another document states that with the exception of people living in Jammu and Kashmir, Sikhs are required to register their residences when relocating. In addition, people need to update their identity documents, such as voter ID cards, when they move. Lastly, some cities, such as Delhi, have laws that require landlords to register their tenants, which requires getting a police background check of the tenant.38
[36] After attentively reading the appellant's arguments and the reasons for the RPD decision, I am of the opinion that the RPD failed to examine key elements of the evidence regarding the conditions in Mumbai and Delhi for individuals who seek refuge there when they have problems with the police in other regions of their country. In my opinion, this is an unreasonable error. Taking this error into consideration, I conclude that the RPD decision regarding the appellant's IFA in Mumbai and Delhi does not fall within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law.
[37] In this appeal, if I find that the RPD made an unreasonable error and that its decision regarding an IFA for the appellant does not fall within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law, this does not mean that I am personally able to substitute the determination that should have been made for the RPD's determination. In the case at hand, while the recording of the hearing with respect to the appellant's claim for refugee protection is part of the record before me, the fact remains that I cannot substitute my own determination for the determination made by the RPD without hearing the evidence that was presented before it. In addition, according to my understanding of the case law, the credibility of the person who is the subject of the proceeding can be analyzed only at a hearing, and findings can be made in this regard only by a decision-maker who participated in this hearing and heard all the evidence.39 Finally, I did not find in the RPD's decision any analysis regarding state protection. This issue must be analyzed before concluding that the appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution or that it is more likely than not that he would face a personalized risk to his life if he had to return to live in his country.
VII. REMEDIES
[38] For these reasons, I determine that the RPD's determination regarding the claim for refugee protection of XXXX XXXX XXXX must be set aside.
[39] That being said, for the determination that was set aside, I am of the opinion that I cannot substitute a determination that should have been made, particularly because without a hearing, it is not open to me to assess the appellant's credibility and because the RPD decision did not analyze the issue of state protection. Consequently, I am referring the matter to the RPD for re-determination by a differently constituted panel.
[40] The appeal is allowed.
Alain Bissonnette
Me Alain Bissonnette
May 1, 2014
Date
IRB translation
Original language: French
1 BOC Form, pages 13, 18 and 22 of the RPD record.
2 Idem, pages 23, 24 and 25 of the RPD record.
3 RPD decision, pages 3 to 11 of the RPD record.
4 Appellant's memorandum, pages 46 to 51 of the appeal record.
5 Idem, page 51 of the appeal record.
6 Idem, page 46 of the appeal record.
7 Idem, pages 46 and 47 of the appeal record.
8 Section 151 of the IRPA: "The Immigration and Refugee Board consists of the Refugee Protection Division, the Refugee Appeal Division, the Immigration Division and the Immigration Appeal Division."
9 Section 162 of the IRPA.
10 Section 165 of the IRPA.
11 Section 166 of the IRPA.
12 Paragraph 3(2)(e) of the IRPA.
13 Subsection 110(6) of the IRPA.
14 Newton v. Criminal Trial Lawyers' Association, 2010 ABCA 399, paragraphs 55 and 56:
[55] ... While H.L. was decided on the Housen principles, and Khosa was decided on the Dunsmuir/Pushpanathan principles, both cases clearly reject the argument that the mere presence of a right of appeal signals that no deference is called for. There is no principle basis on which to make an exception for appeals within an administrative structure, such as the one that is in issue in this appeal.
[56] The mere presence of a right of appeal from the presiding officer to the Board does not warrant a correctness standard of review.
15 Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33; [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, paragraph 17, as cited by the Alberta Court of Appeal in Newton at paragraph 81.
16 Newton v. Criminal Trial Lawyers' Association, 2010 ABCA 399, paragraph 81.
17 Idem, paragraphs 82 to 84.
18 Kikino Métis Settlement v. Métis Settlements Appeal Tribunal, 2013 ABCA 151, paragraph 12: "This Newton standard of review may well vary depending on the issue at hand. The Appeal Tribunal is charged with preserving and enhancing Métis culture and identity and furthering the attainment of self-governance by Métis settlements under the laws of Alberta: Métis Settlements Act, RSA 2000, c. M-14, s. 0.1. It undoubtedly plays other roles, including, for example, promoting consistency in the interpretation and application of the statutory regime throughout Alberta. To the extent that an appeal raises issues of this type, the Appeal Tribunal owes less deference to the settlement council. The settlement council, on the other hand, is charged with the local management of the Métis settlement, and with having regards to local interests and issues. On those issues, as well as on its basic findings of fact, more deference is due."
19 Laliberté v. Huneault, 2006 QCCA 929, paragraph 16.
20 Parizeau v. Barreau du Québec, 2011 QCCA 1498, paragraphs 75 to 78.
21 Idem, paragraph 79.
22 Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick, 2008 SCC 9; [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190, paragraph 62. Canada (Human Rights Commission) v. Canada (Attorney General), 2011 SCC 53; [2011] 3 S.C.R. 471, paragraph 16.
Cetinkaya v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-3362-11, Russell, January 4, 2012; 2012 FC 8, paragraph 16.
23 Appellant's memorandum, pages 46 to 51 of the appeal record.
24 Walcott v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-5280-09, Gibson, May 10, 2010; 2010 FC 505, paragraph 18. Ndam v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-5447-09, Beaudry, May 14, 2010; 2010 FC 513, paragraph 4. Ferencova v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-3940-10, Mosley, April 8, 2011; 2011 FC 443, paragraph 8.
25 Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick, 2008 SCC 9; [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190, paragraph 47. Gabor Miroslav v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-3466-09, Russell, April 12, 2010; 2010 FC 383, paragraph 22. Bethany Lanae Smith v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-5699-11, Mosley, November 2, 2012; 2012 FC 1283, paragraph 19.
26 Appellant's memorandum, pages 48 to 50 of the appeal record.
27 RPD decision, page 9 of the RPD record.
28 List of documents: Exhibit RT-19 - Office of the civil surgeon XXXXX.
29 RPD decision, pages 10 and 11 of the RPD record.
30 Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Khosa, 2009 SCC 12; [2009] 1 S.C.R. 339, paragraph 59: "Where the reasonableness standard applies, it requires deference. Reviewing courts cannot substitute their own appreciation of the appropriate solution, but must rather determine if the outcome falls within "a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" (Dunsmuir, at para. 47). There might be more than one reasonable outcome. However, as long as the process and the outcome fit comfortably with the principles of justification, transparency and intelligibility, it is not open to a reviewing court to substitute its own view of a preferable outcome."
31 Pawanbir Singh v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-12505-12, Shore, July 23, 2013; 2013 FC 807, paragraph 29.
32 Ahmadsai v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-893-13, Shore, October 10, 2013; 2013 FC 1025, paragraph 23.
33 Ferencova v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-3940-10, Mosley, April 8, 2011; 2011 FC 443, paragraph 24.
34 Herrera Andrade v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-544-12, Gleason, December 18, 2012; 2012 FC 1490, paragraph 14.
35 Ramirez Meza v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), No. IMM-4267-10, Noël, March 10, 2011; 2011 FC 274, paragraph 8.
36 RPD decision, paragraph 49, page 11 of the RPD record.
37 National Documentation Package on India, May 31, 2013: Document 10.2: Research Directorate, IRB, India: Communication between police offices across the country; whether police across India can locate an individual, particularly as a result of registration requirements for employment, housing and education, security checks, and technological surveillance, May 14, 2012, IND104065.EF, 7 pages, page 3.
38 National Documentation Package on India, May 31, 2013: Document 14.4: Research Directorate, IRB, India: Situation of Sikhs outside the state of Punjab, including treatment by authorities; ability of Sikhs to relocate within India, including challenges they may encounter (2009-April 2013), May 13, 2013, IND104369.E, 17 pages, pages 9 and 10.
39 Singh v. Minister of Employment and Immigration, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 177: At pages 213 and 214, Madam Justice Wilson's reasons read in part as follows: "...even if hearings based on written submissions are consistent with the principles of fundamental justice for some purposes, they will not be satisfactory for all purposes. In particular, I am of the view that where a serious issue of credibility is involved, fundamental justice requires that credibility be determined on the basis of an oral hearing. Appellate courts are well aware of the inherent weakness of written transcripts where questions of credibility are at stake and thus are extremely loath to review the findings of tribunals which have had the benefit of hearing the testimony of witnesses in person [citations omitted] I find it difficult to conceive of a situation in which compliance with fundamental justice could be achieved by a tribunal making significant findings of credibility solely on the basis of written submissions.
Killen v. Minister of Transport, T-2410-97, Gibson, June 8, 1999; 1999 CanLII 8354 (FC), paragraph 14: "I find that the only option available to the Tribunal in the circumstances was to evaluate the testimony given before the member of the Tribunal on the basis of the transcript of that testimony. In doing so, it is indeed unfortunate that it adopted the language of "credibility" with respect to the testimony of Mrs. Matheson. It was simply not in a position to determine credibility. That being said, I am satisfied that it was open to the Tribunal to evaluate the evidence on the basis of the transcript and in so doing to give greater weight to the specific and detailed testimony of Mrs. Matheson as against the necessarily more generalized testimony of the applicant and his student pilot."
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
N° de dossier de the RAD / RAD File No.:MB4-00848
RAD.25.02 (February 7, 2014)
Disponible en français
RAD File No. / N° de dossier de la SAR : MB4-00848
2
