RPD File No. / N° de dossier de la SPR : TB4-06894
Private Proceeding / Huis clos
Reasons and Decision ? Motifs et Décision
Claimant(s)
XXXX XXXX XXXX
Demandeur(e)(s) d'asile
Date(s) of Hearing
September 29, 2014
Date(s) de l'audience
Place of Hearing
Toronto, Ontario
Lieu de l'audience
Date of Decision
April 17, 2015
Date de la décision
and reasons
et des motifs
Panel
K. Pike
Tribunal
Counsel for the Claimant(s)
Georgina C. Murphy
Barrister and Solicitor
Conseil(s) du (de la/des) demandeur(e)(s) d'asile
Designated Representative(s)
N/A
Représentant(e)(s) désigné(e)(s)
Counsel for the Minister
N/A
Conseil du (de la) ministre
REASONS FOR DECISION
[1] This is the decision in the claim of XXXX XXXX XXXX, a citizen of Pakistan claiming refugee protection pursuant to ss. 96 and 97(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act.1
ALLEGATIONS
[2] The claimant alleges he is an Ahmadi Muslims and as such is at risk of harm in Pakistan. His allegations are outlined in his Basis of Claim form and include being threatened, having his religious practice restricted, and facing difficulty in obtaining and maintaining work.
[3] The claimant obtained a United States visa in XXXX 2012, left Pakistan to the USA in XXXX 2014 and proceeded to Canada where he made a refugee claim at the port of entry.
DETERMINATION
[4] The panel finds that the claimant is neither a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection. My reasons are as follows.
ANALYSIS
Identity
[5] I find that the claimant is a national of Pakistan as is established by testimony and the supporting documentation filed.2 Namely, the panel has copies of his Pakistani passport. Similarly, evidence provided establishes that he is Ahmadi.
Section 96 - Convention Refugee Grounds
[6] The determinative issue in this section 96 analysis is subjective fear.
Subjective Fear
[7] The panel finds that the claimant has not established a subjective basis for the fear of persecution.
[8] The claimant's evidence shows a very significant delay in leaving Pakistan, which the panel is not satisfied was sufficiently explained.
Delay
[9] The claimant received his United States visas in XXXX, 2012. He states he applied for and received this visa with the intention of using it to flee persecution in Pakistan and travel to Canada to make a refugee claim. He did not leave Pakistan until XXXX, 2014. An extended delay in leaving a country of alleged persecution can be viewed as indicative of a lack of subjective fear, if the explanation for such a delay does not explain why such a delay was necessary.
[10] The claimant stated he remained in Pakistan throughout this time because his father suffered an injury shortly after he received the visa in XXXX, 2012 and he had to remain in the country to care for him. He explained that his father had XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX that required surgery, and the physical demands of his care required him to be caregiver. His parents received Canadian visas in XXXX, 2013, but, according to the claimant, they could not leave as his father's injury remained too serious for him to fly to Canada, and so they all remained until XXXX, 2014, when his father's injury was sufficiently healed to allow him to travel. In the meantime, the claimant's brother who lives permanently in Canada returned to Pakistan to attend a family wedding in XXXX, 2013.
[11] The panel was provided with documentary evidence related to the injury sustained by the claimant's father. It consists of a "discharge summary" from the hospital where he was treated from XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX, 2012 and two documents that appear to be from follow-up appointments on XXXX XXXX 2012 and XXXX XXXX 2012. The discharge summary states that the claimant's father did receive surgery, and includes notes on a follow-up appointment to have the stitches removed and special instructions that read "Patient advised to walk as demonstrated, patient is also advised to continue previous medicines also"3.
[12] The claimant stated in the hearing that it was not until XXXX, 2014 that his father began to be able to walk on his own a little bit, and so that is when they all decided to leave. The claimant alleges that prior to this his father was unable to manage without him or travel.
[13] The panel notes that the letter from the hospital dated XXXX XXXX, 2012 specifically states that the claimant's father was under instructions at that time to walk "as demonstrated." The claimant stated that this related to the claimant's father using a "frame" to help him walk a bit and get his strength and movement back. He claimed that his father started walking a little bit on his own in XXXX, 2014.
[14] The panel finds the medical evidence does not support with the claimant's allegations that his father was unable to be mobile enough to either travel or survive without the claimant until XXXX, 2014. The note from the hospital states that the claimant's father was shown and instructed to start walking almost immediately after his surgery. The panel then has two other medical notes dated shortly after this and no other documentary evidence of continuing care past XXXX, 2012. While the panel certainly accepts that the claimant may not have been able to leave Pakistan in the aftermath of his father's injury, it simply does not have sufficient reliable evidence that this situation continued for such a lengthy period of time that it explains the nearly two year delay between the claimant receiving his United States visa and him leaving the country. The panel finds a more likely explanation is that the claimant simply did not feel the need to leave the country because he did not have a genuine fear of harm that would require him to do so.
[15] This is more so the case when the panel considers that the claimant testified his father obtained a Canadian visa in XXXX 2013. At this point, he was in a position to leave Pakistan and travel to Canada, which would have allowed the claimant to similarly make his way here. The claimant alleges this did not happen because his father's health situation did not allow him to travel, as he needed help to sit, stand and walk and was in some pain and so could not travel on his own. The panel noted that the claimant's brother from Canada had recently returned to Pakistan to attend a family wedding, and asked why, if his father required help to fly to Canada, his brother did not return to Pakistan to help with this. The claimant replied that he did not come because his brother had recently been to Pakistan and thought that his father would just come when he gets better. This did not, apparently, happen until July XXXX, nearly ten months later.
[16] This, in the panel's view, essentially means that the family decided the claimant and his parents could remain in Pakistan for a significant amount of time until his father's health situation improved, as this was a better prospect for them than having the claimant's brother return to Pakistan shortly after he had already been there for a social engagement. The panel is baffled by this decision. The claimant alleged that his brother knew of the problems in Pakistan for the claimant, his family, and other Ahmadis but returned for a family wedding and to visit with their parents, as this was important to him. And yet, it was not apparently of similar importance to facilitate the claimant and his parents' flight from the alleged persecution they were facing in Pakistan. While the claimant is not responsible for his brother's actions, the panel would expect that such a decision would evoke some kind of emotional response from the claimant, either at the time or when explaining it at the hearing. This was not the case, rather, the claimant explained this decision in a manner that suggested to the panel that he saw it as natural or not of significance.
[17] The panel would expect that if the claimant were remaining in a situation of persecution in order to care for his father, that, when his father was able to leave the country, thus allowing the claimant to also leave, that they would make all possible efforts to affect their escape. The evidence does not support that this was done.
[18] The panel considered that the claimant stated that he took precautions for his safety during this time, specifically stating he did not go out at night. The panel is unclear how not going out at night would have afforded the claimant protection from the harm he stated he feared, such that he felt he could stay in the country for such an extended period of time. It notes that he continued to take his father out to appointments and attend religious ceremonies during this time. The previous harm he alleged he, the community, and his family members suffered from did not happen primarily at night, but rather in the streets during the day or at the mosque.
[19] For all of the above reasons, the panel rejects the claimant's explanation for his lengthy delay in leaving Pakistan and finds that it was more likely because he did not hold a subjective fear of persecution while there.
Conclusion - subjective fear
[20] For all of the above reasons, the panel finds the claimant's actions do not accord with his stated fear of return and as such he has not provided sufficient credible evidence to establish that he holds a subjective fear of return to Pakistan.
Credibility
[21] Further, the panel finds that the claimant's actions outlined above and lack of clear explanation for these actions causes the panel to disbelieve the credibility of his statement that he faced risk in Pakistan as alleged. If his allegations of facing harm were credible, the claimant would have been more diligent in exiting the country in order to seek safety from this harm.
Conclusion - section 96
[22] In order to be a Convention refugee, both the subjective and the objective basis of the claim must be made out, and in the case of the claimant, for the above reasons, the panel finds this has not been done and as a result, the claimant is not a Convention refugee as his fear of return to Pakistan is not well-founded.
[23] This recognizes that the claimant is in a particular position to assess the risk of persecution that he faces in his own country, as he is aware of all of the factors of his own individual situation, and if his actions fail to show that, in his own assessment, he faces a risk of persecution there, there is less than a serious possibility that such a risk exists. In other words, in the panel's view, the evidence of the claimant's own assessment of his risk is significant evidence for the panel in assessing the level of his risk of return and leads the panel to find there to be less than a serious possibility of persecution.
[24] It would be speculative for the panel in these circumstances, where there are credibility concerns with the claimant's evidence, to determine why the claimant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution when others in similar circumstances may well do so. There are many possibilities which may include having a family status or political status that is more important that religious status in terms of the treatment received, or failure to actually practice their religion, for example. But the panel is satisfied that the claimant's actions and the credibility concerns outlined belie that this claimant in particular holds a well-founded fear of persecution for the reasons stated.
Section 97 - person in need of protection
[25] Having found the claimant not to be a Convention refugee, the risk he faces must be analyzed under section 97 of the Act to determine if he faces a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, risk to his life, or a danger of torture, on a balance of probabilities. Risk of Harm- objective basis
[26] The documentary evidence outlines the following regarding the situation for Ahmadis in Pakistan.
[27] The reported number of Ahmadis in Pakistan vary. According to the Pakistani census of 1998, Ahmadis represented 0.22 percent of the total population in Pakistan. The US Central Intelligence Agency World Factbook estimates the population of Pakistan, as of July 2012, at 190,291,129 inhabitants.4 This amounts to approximately 418,000 residents. However, the UK home office reports that "the Ahmadi community has put the number of Ahmadis living in Pakistan at nearly 600,000, although it is difficult to establish an accurate estimate because Ahmadis, who are legally prohibited from identifying themselves as Muslims, generally choose to not identify themselves as non-Muslims. The US Commission on International Religious Freedom report 2010 estimated that there are 3-4 million Ahmadis in Pakistan."5 This suggests that the number of Ahmadis reported on the Pakistan census would potentially be low, as identifying themselves as Ahmadi may be unlikely in such circumstances as on a government census. As such, the panel finds there are likely at least 600 000 Ahmadis living in Pakistan, and potentially many more.
[28] In 1984, Pakistan introduced what are widely referred to as "anti-Ahmadi" laws. The precise wording of this law is included in the claimant's disclosure, but is well summarized by the United Kingdom home office as follows: "The legislation not only prohibits preaching and other forms of proselytising but also in practice restricts other elements of manifesting one's religious beliefs, such as holding open discourse about religion with non-Ahmadis, although not amounting to proselytising. The prohibitions include openly referring to one's place of worship as a mosque and to one's religious leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are not permitted to refer to the call to prayer as azan nor to call themselves Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions include a fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found, there is a risk of the death penalty which to date has not been carried out although there is a risk of lengthy incarceration if the penalty is imposed."6
[29] In addition, blasphemy laws are sometimes used against Ahmadis, as is the case with other religious minorities in the country.7 The UN reports that:
According to the National Commission of Justice and Peace, a human rights organization sponsored by the Catholic Church of Pakistan, at least 1,060 people, including 456 Ahmadis, were charged under the blasphemy law between 1986 and 2010.144 At least 67 Ahmadis were reportedly charged with blasphemy in 2010145 and 57 in 2009.146 Although only two new cases of blasphemy offenses against Ahmadis were reported in 2011,147 an upsurge in blasphemy allegations, including against Ahmadis, was reported following the high-profile assassinations of Governor Taseer and Minister Bhatti earlier last year.148 According to reports, members of the Ahmadi community are often charged with religious offences on spurious grounds or to settle personal or business disputes.8
[30] Evidence suggests there is some discrimination in schools and employment against Ahmadis. This includes difficulty obtaining education due to being rejected from schools and being refused employment or refused promotions while employed.9
[31] Reports also suggest that Ahmadis are targeted with harassment, hate speech, segregation, attacks on property, targeted assassinations, attacks on places of worship, among other forms of harm10. Prominently, in 2010, coordinated attacks on Ahmadi places of worship in Lahore resulted in around 90 people killed.11 Other incidents are outlined in the claimant's disclosure, including in a number of reports and press releases that show various murders over a number of years of Ahmadis.12
[32] The claimant testified that he was able to continue to attend the Mosque and undertake certain religious activities, but that his religious practice has been restricted in Pakistan by being unable to pray at the Mosque as many times each day as previously and by attending religious meetings less frequently, as well as encountering verbal abuse by others when attempting to attend religious services.
Risk of Harm - section 97 claim
[33] The panel finds that while there are reported incidents of Ahmadis being killed, arrested, and otherwise harmed, it is not so common as to amount to a risk to the claimant on a balance of probabilities. As noted, there are likely over 600 000 Ahmadis in Pakistan. The number of persons killed or arrested for blasphemy or otherwise similarly targeted are in the hundreds or low thousands of persons over a number of years. While this suggests there is a possibility of such things happening to Ahmadis, the panel finds it does not suggest that such a fate is likely to befall an Ahmadi, and as such the claimant, living in Pakistan today.
[34] The claimant has not provided credible evidence of personal threats such that the risk he faces of such harm is higher than what the evidence suggests is the general situation for Ahmadis in Pakistan as noted above. While he stated that he received threatening text messages from time to time, he states that this has occurred since 2010, was unable to provide any copies of these messages as he stated he had deleted them all, could not remember how long they had been coming(first saying either one or two years and then stating he thought the last one was at the beginning of 2014) and that the messages did not personally threaten him. He took no action as a result of getting these messages, such as reporting them, responding to them, or changing his cell phone number. The panel is not satisfied that, if the claimant were actually getting such messages, (and his testimony on this point did not, in the panel's view, support that this was credibly so given his inconsistent and vague testimony about their receipt) that they resulted in any real threat to the claimant given the apparent lengthy period of time they arrived with no action against him by the senders and the claimant's own lack of action as a result of receiving them.
[35] Further, his failure to leave Pakistan without significant delay leads the panel to conclude that the claimant himself did not believe his personal safety was likely to be at risk, and he is in a unique position to make such an assessment. In other words, his actions belie the credibility of his statements that he faced risk in Pakistan for the reasons stated. While the test is certainly forward-looking, a lack of past experiences of harm can be considered when determining the likelihood of such problems befalling the claimant upon his return. In other words, when determining risk, the panel must consider not only what the documentary evidence says, but what the experiences and actions of the claimant himself suggests is his personal risk situation. In this case, the claimant's past experiences and his past actions suggest there is not a credible significant risk to him personally.
[36] The panel finds the other concerns of the claimant - and in particular the restrictions on religious practice - do not amount to cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, a risk to his life, or a danger of torture. The panel finds it reasonable to consider and put significant weight on the claimant's own actions when assessing if restrictions on religious practice amount to cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, as whether they do so can reasonably depend on the importance of such practices to the claimant in his own practice of the faith. In other words, if a particular restricted activity is not important to the claimant, it is unlikely to result in him experiencing cruel and unusual treatment when it is restricted, even if it were to do so for others of the same faith. While there are restrictions on religious practice put in place both by the Pakistani government and by the faith itself in response to safety concerns, such restrictions have been in place for years and were not so serious that the claimant felt the need leave the country to seek protection at his first opportunity so that he could practice more freely. This suggests the claimant's allegation that these restrictions caused him significant harm are not credible , as if they were, he would have left the country in order to practice freely when he was able to do so. If, in the claimant's own assessment, these restrictions were not serious enough to warrant seeking protection, the panel finds they were not so serious as to amount to cruel and unusual treatment or punishment in his particular circumstances. Further, the claimant testified he was able to continue to attend the Mosque and attend meetings, just with less frequency. The restrictions, then, in this case, do not, in the panel's view, amount to cruel and unusual treatment or punishment as they did not result in a situation where the claimant was unable to continue in the practice of important aspects of his faith.
[37] For all of these reasons, the panel finds the claimant is not a person in need of protection as the objective evidence does not establish that he faces, on a balance of probabilities, a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, a risk to his life, or a danger of torture.
CONCLUSION
[38] The claimant has not established a well-founded fear of persecution nor would he be subjected personally, on a balance of probabilities, to a risk to life, a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, or a danger of torture, should he return to Pakistan. Accordingly, the claimant is neither a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection.
[39] His claim is rejected.
(signed)
"K. Pike"
K. Pike
April 17, 2015
Date
1 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27.
2 Exhibit 1, copy of passport.
3 Exhibit 6, tab 15
4 Exhibit 3, item 12.6.
5 Exhibit 3, item 1.7.
6 Exhibit 3, item 1.7.
7 Exhibit 3, item 1.8 among others.
8 Exhibit 3, item 1.8.
9 Exhibit 3, item 12.6.
10 Ibid.
11 Ibid, among others.
12 Exhibit 5.
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
RPD.29.1 (August 31, 2012)
RPD File No. / N° de dossier de la SPR : TB4-06894
