Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié
Section de la protection des réfugiés
Immigration and Refugee Board
Refugee Protection Division
No. dossier SPR / RPD file #: MA1-01094
Huis clos
Private Proceeding
Demandeur(e)s d'asile
Claimant(s)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Date(s) de l'audience
Date(s) of Hearing
December 3, 2002
Lieu de l'audience
Place of Hearing
Montreal
Date de la décision
Date of decision
December 24, 2002
Tribunal
Panel
Georges Gustave
Conseil du demandeur d'asile
Claimant's Counsel
Me Danielle Arpin
Agent de la protection des réfugiés
Refugee Protection Officer
Me Galia Rouleau-Dumont
Représentant désigné
Designated representative
N/A
Conseil du ministre
Minister's Counsel
N/A
La Direction des services de révision et de traduction de la CISR peut vous procurer les présents motifs de décision dans l'autre langue officielle. Vous n'avez qu'à en faire la demande par écrit à l'adresse suivante : 344, rue Slater, 14e étage, Ottawa (Ontario) K1A 0K1, par courriel à traduction@cisr.gc.ca ou par télécopie au (613) 947-3213.
You can obtain the translation of these reasons for decision in the other official language by writing to the Editing and Translation Services Directorate of the IRB at the following address: 344 Slater Street, 14th Floor, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0K1, by e-mail at translation@irb.gc.ca or by facsimile at (613) 947-3213.
INTRODUCTION
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX is a 28-year-old citizen of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria. He travelled to Canada via Belgium and arrived at Dorval airport on February 5, 2001 and claimed refugee status the same day. He states that he fears being persecuted in his country by reason of imputed political opinion and membership in a particular social group, as he is a former police officer. He is also claiming refugee protection because he believes that he is subject to a danger of torture, to a risk to his life and to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment.
Summary of alleged facts
In XXX 1994, after a four-month period of accelerated training, the claimant was assigned as an officer of public order (AOP) to the police force of XXXXXX, in the XXXX XXXXX. In the beginning, he was assigned to administrative duties that consisted of receiving citizens, taking down their complaints and referring them to various departments.
On XXXXX, 1994, while on supply duty to get food and cigarettes, the claimant and eight of his fellow officers were caught in an ambush set up by a group of armed terrorists. Two police officers were killed, and seven others were wounded. The claimant took three bullets in the back. He therefore convalesced until early 1996, as a victim of terrorism, following a decision made by the director general of the Sûreté nationale [national police force], produced as Exhibit P-6. Following this attack and during his convalescence, the claimant did not receive any threats from the terrorists. During his period of convalescence, he lived with his sisters. His mother had been in Canada since 1993. His father had remarried and lived alone with his new wife.
In XXXXXXX 1996, the claimant went back to work at the same police station, working in personnel management.
On page 2 of his written statement, the claimant said that the draft legislation on civil concord that the new president had introduced had raised much hope of peace. The claimant went on to say that this hope was dispelled. There was a new outbreak of acts of terrorism, of an intensity never seen before, directed equally against civilians and members of the military and police forces.
The claimant stated that if he had to return to Algeria, he fears being killed by the terrorists, or else being imprisoned by the police for abandoning his position. According to the news that had been sent to him, his father had received a document notifying him that the claimant had abandoned his position. This document, which was allegedly in Algeria, was not led in evidence.
These are, in essence, the facts that were brought before the panel by the claimant, who was the only witness in this case.
ANALYSIS
Having heard the testimony and analyzed all the evidence, the panel finds that the claimant is a citizen of Algeria, as he alleges. His identity has been established by means of the original of his driver's licence, his military service card, his national card, and a copy of his passport, the original of which was seized by the Department of Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC).
As far as the credibility of the claimant is concerned, the panel accepts that he was a police officer and that he was a victim of a terrorist attack in XXXXX 1994.
However, the panel does not believe that he was a personal target of the terrorists. If that were the case, the terrorists would have threatened him directly and would even have taken steps to attack him, especially since during the entire period of his convalescence, which lasted 18 months (from XXXX 1994 to XXXX 1996), the claimant lived at home, with his sisters. It should be recalled that he testified to the effect that he had not received any threats from the terrorists, either during his convalescence or afterwards.
The claimant was a victim of the attack indicated above at that specific moment because in his capacity as a police officer, he happened to be in a police van that was involved in an operation to supply a police group with food and cigarettes. Consequently, he was not personally targeted.
In the circumstances, the panel does not believe that anyone called the claimant's father about him, first in 1998 to tell the father that his son was a traitor, and again in 2001 after the claimant had left the country, to remind the father that his son had left for Canada. If the terrorists had never approached the claimant to threaten him, the panel does not see why they would have gone through his father to do so. The claimant has added these facts, which were not indicated in his answer to Question 37 of his Personal Information Form (PIF), and concerning which no amendment was made, for the purpose of maximizing the chances of having his claim accepted.
The fact of the matter is that the claimant left his country not because he was the subject of personal threats that were made after the attack and his return to work, but because he found himself alone after his sisters joined their mother in Canada, as he said in his testimony. When he was asked why he had left Algeria, apart from the fact that he was victim of an attack in 1994, he frankly replied: "[TRANSLATION] I left Algeria because I was alone."
Moreover, the panel cannot accept the refugee protection claim simply because the claimant was a police officer and might have been the target of terrorists in the same way as all police officers, due to the very nature of their work. That cannot, and could not, make him a "Convention refugee"1 because the general risks arising from work as a police officer in Algeria, like the attack of XXXXX, 1994, are part of the risks of the occupation.
As far as the claimant's fear of the future is concerned, there is every reason to believe that he can return to his country and live there with complete peace of mind. In the first place, in the seven years following the attack, and until he left for Canada, he did not have problems with any Islamic fundamentalist group whatsoever. Secondly, he was always assigned to administrative duties, which made him an anonymous figure confined to the office. Thirdly, one of his fellow officers, who had also been a victim of the attack, was transferred to office work and is still working as a police officer, has never had any problems with the terrorists, according to the claimant's testimony. In the circumstances, the panel does not see why the claimant would have problems with the terrorists in future, even though he is a former police officer.
It is unlikely that the claimant would have problems with Islamic terrorist groups in future, especially since he was not personally targeted by these individuals and since for the last two years, terrorism has become a strictly rural phenomenon,2 as can be seen from the following statement:
The violence takes place primarily in the countryside and smaller towns as the security forces have largely forced the insurgents out of the cities.
At the conclusion of his testimony, the claimant stated that he feared returning to Algeria because he had abandoned his position as a police officer and a notice to that effect had been sent to his father. This fear is accessory to the principal fear and cannot form the basis for the panel to accept the claim, since any sanction against a police officer who has abandoned his position must be interpreted as a disciplinary action, not as persecution, as can be seen from the documentary evidence:3
Responsibility for maintaining law and order is shared by the Gendarmerie Nationale and the Sûreté Nationale. Members wishing to be discharged must have their resignation approved by a special police commission and leaving the force without authorisation can incur punishments ranging from a fine to imprisonment.
Danger of torture
The panel has no reason to believe that the claimant would be personally subject to the danger of torture. As discussed above, the most he would face for abandoning his position would be the imposition of a fine or a prison sentence.
Risk to life
There is also no serious possibility that the claimant would be subject to a risk to his life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment since the claimant was not personally targeted in the terrorist attack of XXXXX, 1994. In the mind of the terrorists, the attack was not directed towards an individual in particular, but towards members of the police. The victims could have been members of the gendarmerie, or even of the army.
The fact that the claimant was not bothered following this attack is proof that he was not personally targeted. The panel does not see why he would be targeted if he returned to his country, when he was never targeted during the seven years following the attack.
CONCLUSION
For all these reasons, the panel determines that XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX is neither a "Convention refugee" nor a "person in need of protection",4 as defined in sections 96 and 97(1)(a) and (b) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA).
Georges Gustave
Georges Gustave
December 24, 2002
Date
1 96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
2 Exhibit A-5, Algeria, April 2002, Country Information and Policy Unit, paragraph 5.B.18, page 28.
3 Ibid., paragraph 4.57, page 17.
4 97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(a) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(b) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
KEYWORDS - PERSONAL RISK - NEGATIVE - MALE - ALGERIA
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
No. dossier SPR / RPD file #: MA1-01094
5
