
RPD File No. / N° de dossier de la SPR : TA8-24282
TA8-24312
Private Proceeding / Huis clos
Reasons and Decision ? Motifs et décision
Claimant(s)
XXXXX XXXXX
XXXXX XXXXX
Demandeur(e)(s) d'asile
Date(s) of Hearing
February 15, 2010
May 17, 2010
Date(s) de l'audience
Place of Hearing
Toronto, Ontario
Lieu de l'audience
Date of Decision
June 7, 2010
Date de la décision
Panel
B. Volpentesta
Tribunal
Counsel for the Claimant(s)
George J. Kubes
Conseil(s) du / de la / des demandeur(e)(s) d'asile
Tribunal Officer
N/A
Agent(e) de tribunal
Designated Representative(s)
Représentant(e)(s) désigné(e)(s)
Counsel for the Minister
Conseil du ministre
[1] XXXXX XXXXX (the "claimant") claims to be a citizen of the Czech Republic and makes a request for protection under sections 96 and 97(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA).1 Although the claimant had arrived and requested protection along with her husband, XXXXX XXXXX, sadly Mr. XXXXX succumbed to his battle with a persistent medical condition before the hearing date.2
ALLEGATIONS
[2] The claimant alleges the following:
The claimant is a Roma. Roma are treated differently in the Czech Republic. They are the targets of racism and prejudice. The claimant suffered as a result of these attitudes. She has been verbally insulted in her everyday life. The claimant went to a special school; her children went to special schools. Her late husband was not treated with appropriate medical care. She was attacked by a neighbour. The claimant was also attacked by some members of a radical neo-Nazi group known as skinheads. This has caused the claimant to fear going out of her home. In XXXXX 2008 the claimant and her late husband came to Canada and requested protection shortly after their arrival. The claimant fears if she returns to the Czech Republic the persecution will continue and she may be killed.
Procedural Issue - Institutional Bias
[3] At the hearing, counsel for the claimant raised a concern that there was a reasonable apprehension of institutional bias and that the panel could be seen as biased and unduly influenced by statements made by Canada's Minister of Citizenship and Immigration. Counsel argues that, since the Minister is directly involved with the appointment and reappointment of members of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB), an informed person viewing the matter realistically and practically would conclude that the decision-maker would not be able to decide Czech Roma claims fairly. Counsel relied on news articles containing the Minister's comments and on statistical information comparing the results of Czech Roma cases at the Board from 2008 and 2009.3 Counsel argues that the comments and imposition of a visa on citizens of the Czech Republic is flawed and founded on misconceptions and faulty logic in that these occurred despite a 94% acceptance rate for Roma claimants prior to the visa imposition. Counsel requested that the Board suspend the hearing until the Federal Court could rule on a case pending where the bias argument was made, or in the alternative that no decision is made until the Federal Court makes its ruling.
[4] A decision on the motion was not made at the hearing and counsel agreed to continue with the hearing with a decision on the motion to be made after the hearing. These are the reasons for my decision to deny counsel's motion. I have reviewed the supporting documents and have carefully considered the submissions made at the hearing. In addition, I have also considered the relevant jurisprudence, including and in particular: the Committee for Justice and Liberty et al. v. National Energy Board et al., [1978] 1 S.C.R. 369, Valente v. The Queen, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 673; Bell Canada v. Canadian Telephone Employees Association, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 884, 2003 SCC 36; and Mohammad v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1989] 2 F.C. 363 (C.A.). I will address counsel's arguments relating to reasonable apprehension of bias as a result of the statements of the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration with respect to refugee claims from the Czech Republic.
[5] I am an independent decision-maker and part of an independent tribunal and the Minister is not part of the decision-making process. I base my decisions on information that is provided on the record and on the merits of each case. A reasonably well-informed person, with their mind practically to the matter, could conclude that Board members are not biased by the remarks.
[6] The Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB) is an independent quasi-judicial tribunal. In the case of an administrative tribunal, such as the IRB, the required degree of independence is determined by its enabling statute as passed by Parliament, namely the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act. The Board bares the hallmarks of an independent tribunal. Members of the IRB are "appointed to the Board by the Governor in Council, to hold office during good behaviour for a specified term, subject to removal by the Governor in Council at any time for cause ..." (IRPA, s. 153(1)(a)), and they "shall receive the remuneration that may be fixed by the Governor in Council" (IRPA, s. 153(1)(d)). Thus Governor in Council appointees enjoy security of tenure and can only be removed for cause, and enjoy a good deal of financial security against interference from the executive or other external influences or pressures. Through its Chairperson, the Board, as a whole, has control over administrative issues having an immediate impact on the decision-making process (IRPA, s. 159(1)).
[7] Board Members are independent decision-makers. I am not subject to influence by remarks made by the Minister. I decide claims fairly and impartially based on the evidence presented at hearings, and nothing outside the hearing room affects the outcome. Members have taken an oath of office and have agreed to be governed by the Code of Conduct for Members of the Immigration and Refugee Board. Therefore, they can be expected to decide claims impartially and based on the evidence and arguments at a particular hearing.
[8] The Minister is not the decision-maker and the Minister's statements do not constitute evidence going to the merits of the claim. Moreover, the Minister, to my knowledge, has not said that any particular Refugee Protection Division ("RPD") decision regarding the Czech Republic, some of which have been favourable to claimants, was wrongly decided or that no claim from this country can ever be accepted. As stated in Mohammad, regarding the impact of a statement by the Minister in the context of an immigration inquiry before an adjudicator of the then Adjudication Directorate,
"In situations where bias is allegedly revealed in a public address, it has been held that the address must be considered as a whole, not minutely examined. The test is whether prejudice is betrayed in the speaker's words when they are considered as an integrated whole. (R. v. Pickersgill et al., Ex Parte Smith et al (1970), 14 DLR (3d) 717 at 728 (Man. Q.B.)). When taken as a whole, the Ministers' comments in this case appear to me to state a position with respect to a matter which must still go through a legal process, not a conclusion as to what the outcome of that process should be."
"More importantly, as distinguished from the Pickersgill case, here the "speaker" is not the decision-maker. Normally where bias is alleged to flow from a controversial speech, the person delivering it is the one who must make the decision. At this stage of the inquiry process, the Ministers do not determine the applicant's fate. The decision is made by the adjudicator."
[9] Counsel presented statistical information on the completion of Czech Roma cases for 2008 and 2009.4 Counsel argues that the drastic change in acceptance rates of Czech Roma claims can only be explained by the influence the minister's comments had on decision-makers. Firstly, statistical information must be considered carefully and in context, if at all. The interpretation counsel provides includes numbers and a graph. However, the numbers for the final period of 2009 are not legible. Counsel also does not indicate what source the raw data came from and the raw data itself is missing as well. Counsel said that he obtained the statistics from the IRB and I have no reason to doubt that, but the final product counsel provided was an interpretation of the statistics he gathered.
[10] The graphical interpretation provided by counsel shows a flat-line hovering near 100% acceptance for all of 2008, but counsel does not provide the data to support that claim. Then in January 2009 to July of 2009 there is decline in acceptance from 94% to 74%. The decline is depicted as a straight, steady decline from the beginning of the year. The minister made his comments in April 2009.5 Even if I am to accept the interpretation provided by counsel, and I do not, the graph indicates that there was already a change by the first quarter of 2009 and this was prior to the minister's comments. Clearly, some factors were already causing a change even before the minister's comments.
[11] Further, examination of counsel's interpretation of the 2009 Czech Roma numbers reveals that out of 900 finalized cases, 34 were abandoned and 702 were withdrawn. If we are to look only at the statistics without context, just as counsel would have me do, this seems to indicate that 78% of Czech Roma cases were withdrawn by the claimants themselves. Taking into consideration abandonments, 82% of Czech Roma claimants failed to have their initial requests for protection heard either by their own action or for otherwise failing to pursue their claims. Of course we have no way of knowing why, but this is precisely the danger of using statistics to demonstrate a point that counsel would have me ignore.
[12] The Federal Court has already ruled on an argument similar to the one made by counsel. In Dunova6 the court concluded that the comments made by the minister did not give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias. The court stated that statistics of the IRB are not relevant. The court concluded that absent evidence to the contrary, the PRRA officer, who is a public servant, is presumed to be independent and impartial. The court contrasted the case of an IRB member in Geza7 indicating that the PRRA officer in Dunova was completely independent of the circumstances that gave rise to the bias allegation. The same is true in this case; I had and have no role in policy-making. Counsel argues that in Dunova the decision-maker was a public servant protected by a union and therefore insulated from the minister's influence, but the same is not true of IRB members. As I have already stated, IRB members, while not members of a union, have sufficient independence and protection to be protected from the minister's influence as well. I find there are enough similarities on the salient features in Dunova that the same should apply here.
[13] Taking into account all of these considerations, I am satisfied that I, the IRB, and, in particular, the Refugee Protection Division, have sufficient institutional independence, and that the circumstances outlined by counsel do not give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias.
DETERMINATION
[14] I find that the claimant is neither a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection. My reasons are as follows.
ANALYSIS
Identity
[15] The claimant's oral testimony and documentary evidence establish that she is a citizen of the Czech Republic.8
Credibility
[16] Some of the claimant's evidence was not reliable. For example in the claimant's Personal Information Form9 (PIF) narrative she states that she was intentionally nearly run over by a bus three times. However during testimony she could not spontaneously recall any of the incidents. Upon further questioning, and then a specific leading question the claimant recalled that indeed once she was almost hit by a bus. The claimant explained that her memory was not good. I find this explanation unsatisfactory. The incidents are listed in her narrative which was completed in XXXXX 2008, further she says this happened three times to scare her. It is reasonable that she would remember this type of incident particular when it happened so frequently. I find that the claimant was using embellishment to enhance the seriousness of her claim.
[17] When asked about any harm she suffered in the Czech Republic because of race, the claimant described an incident with her neighbour some seven or eight years ago. The claimant says her neighbour accused her of stealing some curtains and when the argument became heated, the neighbour ripped her blouse. However, this incident is not contained in her PIF narrative. The claimant was asked whether the neighbour was also Roma, and after a long pause responded that he was a white Czech. I find the unnaturally long pause to a very simple question to be indicative of deception. On a balance of probabilities, I find the event did not happen as the claimant would have me believe and if it did happen at all, it was not on account of her race.
Section 96 - Convention Refugee Grounds
[18] Does the harm feared amount to persecution? Despite what I have concluded about the claimant's attempts to exaggerate the nature of the harm caused to her because she is Roma, the claimant did recount a number of incidents of discrimination based on her ethnicity. While the claimant complains of education, health care and housing, her own situation is much different. The claimant has had stable housing that was initially given to her by the government, and then within the last five years, one that her daughter purchased for her. With respect to education, the claimant says that she was sent to a special school. However, that was many years ago and now that she has seventeen grandchildren and great-grandchildren, only two are in special schools. One is there because he is hearing-impaired but she did not know why the other was in a special school. With respect to health care the claimant says her husband's death is attributable to the poor health care Roma's receive. However, the claimant testified that her husband received health care. When doctors discovered the cause of his illness it had progress too far to be treated. Although the claimant says he received better treatment in Canada in terms of attitude, her husband still died within months. When her son was diagnosed with a hearing impairment the health care system in the Czech Republic provided him with a hearing-aid. When her son lost the initial one, the Czech government provided another. The claimant said she believed this was helpful and good for her son.
[19] The claimant says she was always verbally harassed and looked down upon or viewed with suspicion. When she went into stores, she would be watched. When she was on the bus the driver would begin moving before she could put her money away and from time to time this would cause her money to fall to the floor. She was verbally assaulted on the bus. On occasion, radical elements of a neo-Nazi group physically assaulted her on the bus. While the claimant faced discrimination, this does not amount to persecution, not even when considered cumulatively. The claimant's fundamental rights were not violated in a way that would threaten her future existence. In fact, steps were taken to protect her future existence. The question really is one of quality of the existence.
[20] Counsel argues that cumulatively the effect of discriminatory practices against the Roma has caused a noticeable statistical difference in life expectancy between Roma and non-Roma persons in the Czech Republic.10 Some of the information provided by counsel relates to Roma generally in Europe and not specifically to the Czech Republic, and the information that does specifically deal with Czech Roma is nearly ten years old. The information also suggests that there are other factors at play as well such as poor nutrition. However, it is difficult to conclude that it is only because they are Roma that they have a different life expectancy.
[21] Considering the cumulative effect, the claimant had long term stable housing, she raised her children including one with a physical challenge, she and her late husband obtained medical care. decades and while their work and education were limited to first level completion along with some trade for the male and younger female claimants, it was not so limited to threaten their existence. The troubling aspect of course is the prevailing attitude.
[22] In this case the discrimination faced by the claimant, even cumulatively, does not rise to the level of persecution. However, she is Roma and there is documentary evidence of persecution of Roma in the Czech Republic and the rise of the right-wing and neo-Nazis who advocate a solution to the Roma problem even by force if necessary.11 The question becomes one of what the state is doing to protect the Roma against such harm.
State Protection
[23] There is documentary evidence that indicates the Roma people are discriminated against and although violent attacks on foreigners and the Roma minority had declined since the 1990s, and remained largely out of the headlines,12 there is also new evidence that racially motivated attacks on minorities in the Czech Republic is on the rise.13 The same documentation refers to the Roma as being vulnerable people in the Czech Republic subjected to ill-treatment from police, and courts do not deal with racially motivated crime harshly enough.
[24] Will the claimant face a serious possibility of persecution simply because she is Roma? The determinative issue then becomes whether the claimant has rebutted the presumption of state protection. I find that she has not.
[25] There is a presumption that a state is capable of protecting its citizens except in situations where the state is in a state of complete breakdown.14 To rebut the presumption of state protection, a claimant must provide clear and convincing evidence of the state's inability to protect absent an admission by the national's state of its inability to protect that national.15 While the effectiveness of the protection is a relevant consideration, the test is whether the protection offered is adequate.16 The evidence that state protection is not adequate must be reliable and probative and it must also satisfy me, on a balance of probabilities, that the state protection is inadequate.17 The claimant must approach the state for protection, providing that state protection might be reasonably forthcoming.18 Where a state is in effective control of its territory, has military, police and civil authority in place and makes serious efforts to protect its citizens, the mere fact it is not always successful at doing so will not be enough to justify a claim that the victims are unable to avail themselves of protection.19 The fact that state protection is not perfect20 does not constitute clear and convincing proof of the state's inability to protect its citizens, since no state can guarantee the protection of all its citizens at all times. Local failures to provide effective policing do not amount to a lack of state protection unless they are part of a broader pattern of the state's inability to provide protection.21 The burden of proof that rests on the claimant increases with the level of democracy of the state in question. The more democratic a state is, the more the claimant must have done to exhaust all course of action open to them to demonstrate state protection was or would not be forthcoming.22
[26] In this case the claimant said she did not go to the police for any of the harm that was caused to her. She explained that when her children were younger at school she used to seek help, but it was not forthcoming and for that reason she believed going to the police would be useless. However, her children were young many years ago. The claimant's youngest child was born in 1975. This would mean that her effort to obtain protection occurred more than twenty-five years ago. With all the changes in the Czech Republic over the last ten or fifteen years, it is unreasonable for the claimant not to have sought state protection based on her very old assumptions.
[27] The probative evidence is not clear and convincing that the Czech state is unwilling or unable to provide adequate protection. There is evidence that the state does not condone and for the most part does not acquiesce to this racial and discriminatory behaviour, particularly of extremist skinheads. For example, in the mid-1990s, the Ministry of the Interior launched an initiative to combat extremism, allowing for police monitoring of extremist group activities and trends.23 The government may prohibit gatherings, concerts, activities or speech which incite hatred and did so throughout 2008.24 In January 2008 police arrested 30 neo-Nazis in the Prague city center.25 In October 2008 police countered a rally of rightist extremists who had arrived at a Romani settlement in Litvinov.26 In May 2008, police successfully prevented a major clash between anarchists and neo-Nazis in Brno, expelling the latter from the city, and at the November 2008 Workers' Party march in Litvinov police were able to break up the demonstrations, and in December 2008 the police prevented the far-right National Party from holding demonstrations in Brno.27 As demonstrated by the DVD videos played at the hearing, although lacking information with respect to date, the videos clearly show riot police suffering attacks of fire bombs in an effort to defend Roma and break up skinhead marches. At several of these demonstrations police put their own lives at risk protecting Czech citizens including the Roma. These efforts clearly indicate that the state can and does take action to offer real and adequate protection to the Roma although it is not perfect.
[28] There is concern that the efforts of the state are not adequate. While there are concerns from some groups that there is impunity for racially motivated attacks and the responses are not sufficient, the preponderance of evidence indicates that the state is taking action against extremists and does not condone or acquiesce to extremist actions, and those actions are effective. Police cannot be solely responsible for changing people's attitudes as this requires a network of social agencies and institutions, but it is clear that police intervene to offer protection when required.
[29] Discrimination is prevalent, but there is evidence that the Czech Republic is taking steps to assist the Roma in several ways to ensure they will be able to participate in the Czech society. For example, in January 2008 the Czech government established an agency for the social inclusion of Romani communities whose aim is to combat social exclusion and the formation of ghettos and improve the socio-economic conditions of Roma through improved access to employment and mainstream education.28 The government continued its long-term integration plan for Roma, which was adopted in 2006 which provides for state-paid advisers to assist Roma in finding employment and special stipends for Romani secondary school students.29 The Inter-ministerial Commission for Romani Community Affairs, coordinated by the minister for human rights and minorities, included 12 government and 14 Romani representatives, as well as the ombudsman; it continued to take an active role in resolving disputes between Romani communities and their non-Romani neighbours. The commission also promoted antidiscrimination initiatives in housing and education.30 Police set up an information campaign to recruit minorities into the police force in Prague, Usti and Labem and Brno.31
[30] The government continued steps to address discrimination in the education of Romani children during the year. It continued the policy of closing "remedial" schools and transferring "slower" students into new special education classes or so-called "practical schools," pursuant to a 2005 law that abolished remedial schools.32 The government has made efforts to encourage Roma children to pursue education the government is encouraging Roma parents to send their children to nursery school for 3 years, subsidizing kindergarten, and recruiting Roma teaching assistants for regular schools, and providing support programs for Roma high school students.33
[31] On the other hand statistics indicate that Roma are still underemployed and less educated. It is noted that critics claim these programs do not go far enough or are just superficial. However, the preponderance of evidence is that there are programs in effect and serious efforts are being made. This information further supports the finding that while there is undoubtedly discrimination against the Roma in the Czech Republic, the state has a variety of programs available to assist the Roma and progress is being made to offering protection to Roma and their rights. Signs of progress may include the fact that Roma children are not automatically put into special schools as demonstrated by the female and younger female claimants and that Roma are included in politics and public programs.
[32] There has been vast improvement and the state offers adequate recourse for women who are victims of sterilization. At least one NGO in Brno stated that accession to the European Union in 2004 has had a positive impact on Czech Roma, pointing to the setting of legal standards; increased financing for programs through the European Union Social Fund and access to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg which has ruled in favour of Roma in cases of forced sterilization (and remedial schools).34 In the Czech Republic, most of the cases involving sterilization of women, of which most were Roma women, were between 1973 and 1991 and the Czech government continued to investigate those. There are a few reports in more recent times, including two from 2007 and 2008.35
[33] However, the Czech authorities acknowledged that some cases of sterilization of Romani women had in the past not strictly complied with Ministry of Health law and guidelines, but they could not conclude the incidents were motivated by a racial or national bias.36
[34] There is evidence that the state is taking action against this practice. The Ostrava Regional Court ruled in October 2008 that a local hospital was liable for a wrongful sterilization performed on Roma woman and recognized her right to financial compensation as well as an apology. A higher court overturned the financial compensation component and that decision is pending at the Supreme Court in Brno. Although the government has so far rejected a plan proposed to pay each sterilization victim, they have sought assistance to establish the extent to which the sterilizations before 1989 were government policy and to what extent individual hospital and social workers were responsible.37
[35] Also, in September 2005, victims of forced sterilization, the majority of whom are Roma, submitted complaints to the Czech Ombudsman who decided that sterilization was illegal and improper, and that the Czech society has to come to terms with this, but did not attribute the sterilization to racial discrimination. Despite this, the Most District State Attorney's Office ruled in May 2007 in a case of two Roma women that non-consensual sterilization was a crime.38
[36] The preponderance of evidence indicates that the forced sterilization of women has ended and that redress is being sought for past cases. There has been some significant success in obtaining redress for past transgressions. This indicates that the Czech authorities do take action against these activities.
[37] The claimant did not experience failure of the protection of the state as much as a failure of societal attitudes in the Czech Republic. Some people, like extremist skinheads and like minded Czech citizens, make life difficult for the Czech Roma but the state is there to fight against such attitudes. While progress and change are not as rapid as people would wish, there is evidence of that change occurring. The evidence indicates that if the claimants experienced any harassment or discrimination they could reasonably expect the state would take adequate measures to provide them with protection. The claimants have not satisfied me with clear and convincing evidence that, on a balance of probabilities, adequate state protection would not be reasonably forthcoming if they should need it.
[38] Therefore, I find the claimants are not Convention refugees and their claims under section 96 of the IRPA fail. The rest of the analysis of this decision will be under section 97 of the IRPA.
Section 97 - Persons in Need of Protection
[39] Counsel argued that if the state does not provide adequate health by reason of at least one of the Convention grounds, then this could also be considered under the risk to life component of a section 97 analysis. I have already considered the effect of the claimant's race on the persecution she may face, and have considered the evidence of inadequate health care above as well. The claimant herself testified that she used health care services several times and was always treated, although not always with an appropriate attitude.
[40] There was no residual information upon which a claim under this section could be determined that was not already considered above. Therefore, I find the claimant is not a person in need of protection and their claims under section 97 of the IRPA fail.
CONCLUSION
[41] The claimant does not have a well-founded fear since there is not a serious possibility of persecution, and she would not be subjected personally, on a balance of probabilities, to a risk to
life, a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, or a danger of torture, should she return to the Czech Republic. Accordingly, the claimant is neither a Convention refugee/s nor a person/s in need of protection.
[42] The claim is rejected.
(signed)
"B. Volpentesta"
B. Volpentesta
June 7, 2010
Date
REFUGEE PROTECTION DIVISION / ETHNICITY / ETHNIC ORIGIN / COUNSEL / MOTION / BIAS / STATEMENT / MINISTRE / PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS / DENIAL / ETHNIC DISCRIMINATION / STATE PROTECTION / FEMALE / NEGATIVE / CZECH REPUBLIC
1 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27.
2 Exhibits C-4 and C-6.
3 Exhibit C-5.
4 Exhibit C-5.
5 Exhibit C-5.
6 Dunova, Zaneta v. M.C.I. (F.C., no. IMM-4050-09), Crampton, April 22, 2010; 2010 FC 438.
7 Geza, Kozak v. M.C.I. and Smajda, Sandor v. M.C.I., (F.C.A. nos. A-419-04 and A-420-04), Evans, Décary, Sharlow, March 27, 2006, 2006 FCA 124.
8 Exhibit R/A-2, copy of passport.
9 Exhibit C-1.
10 Exhibit C-3, items 148,149 and 150; and C-5.
11 Exhibit C-3 and C-5.
12 Exhibit R/A-1, item 13.4, Response to Information Request (RIR) CZE102961.E. 16 December 2008.
13 Exhibit R/A-3, item 2.1, Czech Republic. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2009, US Department of State. 11 March 2010.
14 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689.
15 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689.
16 Flores, Nubia Victoria Suarez v. M.C.I. (F.C., no. IMM-4613-07), Mosley, June 9, 2008, 2008 FC 723.
17 Flores Carillo v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2008] 4 F.C.R. 636 (F.C.A.).
18 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689.
19 Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) v. Villafranca (1992), 18 Imm. L.R. (2d) 130 (F.C.A.).
20 Zalzali v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1991] 3 F.C. 605 (F.C.A.)
21 Zhuravlvev v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2000] 4 F.C. 3 (T.D.)
22 Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Kadenko (1996), 143 D.L.R. (4th) 532 (F.C.A.).
23 Exhibit R/A-3, item 13.1, Czech Republic: Fact-Finding Mission Report on State Protection. Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB). Canada. June 2009.
24 Exhibit R/A-3, item 2.1, Czech Republic. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2009, US Department of State. 11 March 2010.
25Exhibit R/A-3, item 2.1, Czech Republic. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2009, US Department of State. 11 March 2010.
26 Exhibit R/A-1, item 13.4, RIR CZE102961.E. IRB. 16 December 2008.
27 Exhibit R/A-3, item 13.1, Czech Republic: Fact-Finding Mission Report on State Protection. Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB). Canada. June 2009.
28 Exhibit R/A-3, item 13.1, Czech Republic: Fact-Finding Mission Report on State Protection. Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB). Canada. June 2009.
29Exhibit R/A-3, item 2.1, Czech Republic. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2009, US Department of State. 11 March 2010.
30 Exhibit R/A-1, item 2.1, Czech Republic. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2009, US Department of State. 11 March 2010.
31 Exhibit R/A-1, item 13.4, RIR CZE102961.E. 16 December 2008.
32 Exhibit R/A-1, item 2.1, Czech Republic. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2009, US Department of State. 11 March 2010.
33 Exhibit R/A-3, item 13.1, Czech Republic: Fact-Finding Mission Report on State Protection. Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB). Canada. June 2009.
34 Exhibit R/A-3, item 13.1, Czech Republic: Fact-Finding Mission Report on State Protection. Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB). Canada. June 2009.
35 Exhibit R/A-3, item 2.1, Czech Republic. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2009, US Department of State. 11 March 2010.
36 Exhibit R/A-1, item 2.2, "Czech Republic." Amnesty International Report 2009. Amnesty International (AI). 2009.
37 Exhibit R/A-3, item 2.1, Czech Republic. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2009, US Department of State. 11 March 2010.
38Exhibit R/A-3, item 13.1, Czech Republic: Fact-Finding Mission Report on State Protection. Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB). Canada. June 2009.
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
RPD.15.7 (February 12, 2009)
Disponible en français
RPD.15.7 (February 12, 2009)
Disponible en français
RPD File No. : TA8-24282
TA8-24312
RPD File No. :TA8-24282
TA8-24312
