Immigration and Refugee Board
Refugee Protection Division
Commission de l'immigration
et du statut de réfugié
Section de la protection des réfugiés
RPD File # / No. dossier SPR : AA2-00445
Private Proceeding
Huis clos
Claimant Demandeur d'asile
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Date of Hearing Date de l'audience
November 24, 2003
Place of Hearing Lieu de l'audience
St-John's, Newfoundland
Date of Decision Date de la décision
January 15, 2004
Panel Tribunal
Dale L. Noseworthy
Claimant's Counsel Conseil du demandeur d'asile
Joan Dawson
Barrister & Solicitor
Refugee Protection Officer Agente de protection des réfugiés
Julie Morin
Designated Representative Représentant désigné
N/A
Minister's Counsel Conseil du ministre
N/A
You can obtain the translation of these reasons for decision in the other official language by writing to the Editing and Translation Services Directorate of the IRB at the following address: 344 Slater Street,
14th Floor, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0K1, by e-mail to translation@irb.gc.ca or by facsimile at (613) 947-3213.
La Direction des services de révision et de traduction de la CISR peut vous procurer les présents motifs de décision dans l'autre langue officielle. Vous n'avez qu'à en faire la demande par écrit à l'adresse suivante : 344, rue Slater, 14e étage, Ottawa (Ontario) K1A 0K1, par courriel à traduction@cisr.gc.ca ou par télécopieur au (613) 947-3213.
INTRODUCTION
These are the reasons for the determination of the claim for protection made by XXXXXXXXXXXX, a citizen of Panama, who bases his claim for protection upon his Jehovah's Witness religion.
ALLEGATIONS
The claimant alleges that as a Jehovah's Witness, he has been insulted, has had rocks thrown at him and during the past four years in particular, he has experienced acts of vandalism against his home. According to the claimant, the police did nothing to provide protection to him.
The claimant indicated that because of harassment, his parents moved to a different part of Panama City, but the claimant and his brother remained in the same house. The claimant indicated his brother was not having problems because he was not a Jehovah's Witness.
The panel received in evidence as well a letter from the claimant's father discussing the increasing violence in Panama and indicating that his children had been the objects of hostility in Panama.
ANALYSIS
The panel notes the documentary evidence in assessing whether there is an objective basis to this claim for protection. The panel notes in particular Exhibit R-2, which is a Response to Information Request dated March 11, 2003. This document provides information from an official at the Latin America Administration Section of the Jehovah's Witnesses World Headquarters in New York during a March 10, 2003 telephone interview. This official stated that Jehovah's Witnesses are a legal organization operating freely in Panama. They have a branch office and missionaries working in Panama, where they have been operating freely for several decades. This official at Jehovah's Witnesses World Headquarters reported that his office has no knowledge of attacks, harassment, violence or other forms of mistreatment or abuse suffered by Jehovah's Witnesses in Panama over the last decade. He said however there may be isolated cases of prejudice and mistreatment by some groups or individuals, although no nationwide pattern or discernable situation of concern has been noted.
This evidence is supported by other documentary evidence before the panel. For example, in Exhibit R-1 at Tabs 3 and 4, which are the International Religious Freedom Reports for 2001 and 2002, it indicates that the government generally respects religious freedom in practice in Panama. The government at all levels strives to protect this right in full and does not tolerate its abuse, either by governmental or private actors. The documents further indicate that relations among the different faiths are generally harmonious and finally that aggressive Evangelical Protestant criticism of "new" religions such as Jehovah's Witnesses is not widespread.
These documents which set out the objective situation for Jehovah's Witnesses in Panama paint a different picture from the claimant's allegations. The claimant alleges for example that in January 2001, someone said he would like to shoot the claimant, and in July 2001, a group in front of his house was shouting, "You will never know when something will happen to you". The claimant alleges that he took these two incidents as death threats.
In light of the documentary evidence which does not provide support that Jehovah's Witnesses are mistreated in such a fashion in Panama, the claimant was questioned further. The panel noted that the alleged death threats occurred in January and July of 2001 and the claimant did not change his residence until November of 2001. He alleges that the last two months he was in Panama, XXXX and XXXX 2001, he was in hiding at his parents' place where they had been living since approximately the mid-1990s without serious problems.
The claimant was asked why he remained living at the same address where he allegedly received these two death threats until November 2001. The claimant responded that they could not move, that this was their house. He said even if he was living four hours away, the gangs are controlled by the mafia and they will find him anywhere in Panama. He says they will go after him because he is a Jehovah's Witness.
The panel asked if his parents, who are also practising Jehovah's Witnesses in Panama, had been suffering problems in their new place of residence where they moved in the mid-1990s. The claimant indicated that nothing serious has happened to them so far other than some vandalism.
In the panel's view, the claimant's testimony was not plausible, nor credible. Surely if the claimant truly believed that he had been the subject of two genuine death threats, it is not plausible that he would remain living at the same address for so long. It is not plausible that if the claimant truly received two genuine death threats, one in January and one in July 2001, that he would not move to his parents' place, which has been a place of safety for them, until November 2001. The claimant's actions in remaining at the same address are indicative to the panel of a lack of subjective fear of persecution.
This conclusion by the panel is supported by the above noted objective documentary evidence. The panel places more weight upon the independent objective documentary evidence which comes from international sources, including the World Headquarters of the Jehovah's Witnesses in New York, than upon the claimant's testimony which is clearly self-serving and implausible.
CONCLUSION
On the basis of all of the above, the panel concludes that the claimant has not established a well-founded fear of persecution in Panama on the grounds of his Jehovah's Witness religion nor any other Convention grounds. The claimant has further not established a reasonable chance of a risk to life, a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, nor a danger of torture.
On the basis of all of the above, the panel concludes that the claim for protection made by XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX is rejected.
"Dale L. Noseworthy"
Dale L. Noseworthy
Dated at Ottawa this 15th day of January 2004.
REFUGEE PROTECTION DIVISION - RELIGION - EVIDENCE - DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE - CREDIBILITY - MALE - NEGATIVE - PANAMA
RPD File # / No. dossier SPR : ___________
1
RPD File # / No. dossier SPR : AA2-00445
4
