Immigration and
Refugee Board
Refugee Protection Division
Commission de l'immigration
et du statut de réfugié
Section de la protection des réfugiés
RPD File No. / No de dossier de la SPR : MA8-08457
MA8-08460 MA8-08461 MA8-08476 MA8-08509
Private Proceeding
Huis clos
Claimant(s)
Demandeur(e)s d'asile
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX
Date(s) of Hearing
Date(s) de l'audience
October 20, 2009
Place of Hearing
Lieu de l'audience
Montréal, Quebec
Date of Decision
Date de la décision
March 4, 2010
Panel
Tribunal
Pharès Pierre
Claimant's Counsel
Conseil du demandeur d'asile
Me William Aguilar
Tribunal Officer
Agent du tribunal
Honor Weston
Designated Representative
Représentant désigné
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX
Minister's Counsel
Conseil du ministre
N/A
INTRODUCTION
[1] XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX, principal claimant in file MA8-08457, his spouse, XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX, their minor children XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX and XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX, as well as XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX, the mother of the principal claimant's spouse, are all citizens of Mexico. They are claiming refugee protection in Canada under sections 96 and 97 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA). They are alleging the following facts in support of their claim.
[2] The claimant's spouse, their children and the mother of the principal claimant's spouse are all entirely basing their claims on the allegations made by the principal claimant.
[3] The panel has appointed XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX as the designated representative of his minor children.
SUMMARY OF ALLEGED FACTS
[4] In his Personal Information Form (PIF), the principal claimant states that he was attacked and received death threats in his country after he filed a complaint against XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX and against XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX, [translation] "XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX".
[5] He resorted to that action because, convinced by the XXXXX XXXXX friends, who told him that the XXXXX could help him obtain a XXXXX XXXXX, the principal claimant gave XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 40,000 pesos on XXXXX 2006. The XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX, whom Mr. XXXXX had introduced to the claimant on his first visit, promised the claimant that he would receive his XXXXX around the XXXXX XXXXX 2006.
[6] However, in spite of the receipt that Mr. XXXXX gave him when he paid the 40,000 pesos, the claimant never received his XXXXX XXXXX. Instead, the claimant was roughed up by Mr. XXXXX guards and was assaulted and threatened when he tried on a number of occasions to meet with Mr. XXXXX to claim his XXXXX. He then hired a lawyer who accompanied him to the public ministry office in XXXXX on XXXXX, 2006, in order to file a complaint for the theft of the money that he paid for the purchase of a XXXXX XXXXX and for threats and assaults, against the XXXXX XXXXX and against the XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.
[7] The claimant alleged that, fearing for his life because of the assaults and the death threats that they received, they decided, on XXXXX, 2007, to leave Mexico and made the necessary arrangements. The claimant left Mexico on XXXXX 2007, accompanied by his spouse, his two daughters and his mother-in-law on an airplane bound for Montréal, where he and his family arrived on the same day. They claimed refugee protection in Canada when they arrived at the airport.
DETERMINATION
[8] Having heard the testimonies and analyzed all of the evidence on file, the panel determines that there is no basis for granting refugee protection. This determination was made for the following reasons.
ANALYSIS
[9] The panel will focus its analysis on paragraph 97(1)(b) of the IRPA because nothing in the evidence on file and in the claimants' testimonies establishes a nexus with the Convention. Neither is this a case of torture under paragraph 97(1)(a), for the claimants, since no officer of the state or any person acting on behalf of or with the consent of an officer of the state is implicated. As for the principal claimant's spouse, their children and the mother of the spouse, if they wanted to claim refugee protection as members of the principal claimant's family, he would have to have been described by one of the Convention grounds, which is not the case.
Identity
[10] The panel is satisfied as to the identity of all the claimants. Photocopies of their passports are on file. The originals of these documents were seized by Citizenship and Immigration Canada.
Credibility
[11] The principal claimant's testimony was difficult to follow as he provided vague answers. The panel had to repeat important questions in order to obtain clear and complete answers. However, in spite of his difficulties in testifying, the panel finds that the claimant's testimony was credible in regards to the essential elements of his claim.
State protection
[12] Except in situations of complete breakdown of the state apparatus, it should be assumed that the state is capable of protecting a claimant.1 The presumption that a state is capable of protecting its citizens reinforces the principle that international protection comes into play only where no alternative remains to the claimants.2
[13] The claimants are citizens of Mexico, which, according to the documentation,3 is not in a situation of complete breakdown. Therefore, it can be presumed that Mexico is able to protect its own citizens. Therefore, the onus is on the claimants to provide clear and convincing evidence that the authorities in their country are unable or unwilling to protect them. The panel must establish whether state protection was available to the claimant and what efforts he made to avail himself of this protection.
[14] In this case, the panel is of the opinion that the claimants did not establish, through clear and convincing evidence, that the authorities in their country were not able or willing to protect them. The principal claimant testified that the pivotal event in their decision to leave their country and come to Canada to claim refugee protection, after having been assaulted and threatened starting in XXXXX 2006, was the event of XXXXX, 2007. He stated that on that day his wife was mistreated and came close to being abducted by two people whose names they did not know but who said that they worked for XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX. According to the principal claimant's testimony, he did not file a complaint after this attack on his wife. When he was asked to explain why he did not file a complaint, the principal claimant explained that they panicked because they were scared. The panel pointed out to him that this was a good opportunity to file a complaint with the authorities and asked him to explain his behaviour after the attack on his wife. He stated that there is a problem with impunity in Mexico since XXXXX had committed fraud in the past and had never been arrested. When asked whether he had followed up, the principal claimant replied [translation] "No, I was scared". When asked whether he had considered using other options that are made available to citizens by the Mexican government,4 the claimant stated that it was all the same, thereby indicating that he would not be able to get protection from the authorities because of corruption.
[15] He also testified that he was not aware of the hotline, the service5 offered to citizens by the Mexican government, which allows them to file a complaint over the telephone, 24 hours a day. The claimant, who testified that he was scared to file a complaint after his wife was attacked, also testified that the only steps he took to protect himself and his family, was to seek refuge in a small motel 15 km from XXXXX, near his home, from XXXXX, 2007, to XXXXX, 2007, while they prepared for their departure.
[16] As such, the claimants did not file a complaint and made no efforts to obtain help from the authorities in their country. The principal claimant was content to state that he feared how his attackers would react if he filed a complaint and that they could buy the authorities with their money. Omitting to file a complaint is a fatal error if the claimant does not have a good excuse. Stating that the police are corrupt or ineffective, and that they are scared are not good excuses.
[17] The panel is of the opinion that the claimant's explanations for why he did not ask for help from Mexico are not sufficient and did not satisfy the panel because the claimant could have sought the services of a lawyer or used one of the services provided to citizens of Mexico, such as the hotline, the on-line service. In the absence of a convincing explanation, not soliciting the protection of the state in the country of origin would usually be fatal for a claim for refugee protection - at least if the state in question is a functioning democracy that wants to ensure a certain level of protection for its citizens and has the necessary resources to do so.6
[18] The claimant stated that on XXXXX, 2006, in the company of his wife, her father and his lawyer, he went to the office of the public ministry in XXXXX and filed a complaint against XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX and XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX, following one of the physical assaults against him in XXXXX office. He then testified that on XXXXX, 2007, the judge ruled in his case and issued an arrest warrant against XXXXX, but that nothing happened. Even though in paragraph 25 of his PIF, he states that XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX was arrested on XXXXX, 2007, in his testimony at the hearing he maintained that the state did not do its work since his attacker was released the next day. The panel asked him whether he had the copy of the complaint that he filed on XXXXX, 2006, with the office of the public ministry. He stated that he did not have it with him in the hearing room. According to Tab 9.2 of the National Documentation Package, a Mexican citizen can request, at no cost, that such a document be sent from Mexico via the Mexican consulate in Canada. Knowing that this can take from 5-6 weeks, the panel is of the opinion that, in this particular case, it is opportune to allow a 6-week delay to obtain a copy of the complaint and allow an additional delay for it to be translated into one of Canada's official languages. The panel should receive the complete package on or before XXXXX, 2010.
[19] However, at the time of writing these lines, on February 18, 2010, no document has been received by the tribunal's Registry, as per the memorandum of January 19, 2010, submitted on file. Consequently, in these particular circumstances, since the claimant did not file the document in question, although he is required to do so under Rule 7, and despite the fact that he was granted an exceptionally generous amount of time to do so, the panel concludes that the claimant omitted to file a complaint after the alleged attack against him in XXXXX 2006. The panel was expecting more reasonable behaviour from a refugee protection claimant regarding his obligations to provide all pertinent documentation in preparing his case.
[20] Therefore, in the two instances where the claimants were subjected to physical assaults that could have endangered their lives, they did not see fit to make any serious efforts to obtain the protection of the authorities in their country.
[21] The inability of the state to protect its citizens cannot be based on the subjective perception of a refugee protection claimant.7 The refugee protection claimant cannot refute the presumption of state protection in a country with a functional democracy by simply invoking a subjective reluctance to solicit state protection.8 The panel therefore determines that the claimants did not provide any clear and convincing evidence that they could not obtain protection from their country. Notwithstanding their fear of filing a complaint out of fear of reprisals from their attackers, and the claimants' beliefs regarding the work of the police in their country, nothing in the evidence on file or in the testimony supports the contention that the police did not want to, or could not, help them.
[22] Consequently, the panel determines that the claimants did not discharge their burden of refuting the presumption that Mexico would be in a position to provide them with protection.
CONCLUSION
[23] Having considered all the evidence, the panel concludes that they did not manage to demonstrate, on a balance of probabilities, that should they return to Mexico, they would be personally subjected to a danger of torture, or to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment.
[24] For these reasons, the panel determines that XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX and XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX, as well as XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX, are not "Convention refugees" under section 96 of the IRPA, or "persons in need of protection" under paragraphs 97(1)(a) and (b) of the Act.
[25] Consequently, their claims for refugee protection are rejected.
Pharès Pierre
Pharès Pierre
March 4, 2010
Date
IRB translation
Original language: French
REFUGEE PROTECTION DIVISION / POLITICAL OPPOSITION / DENUNCIATION / VICTIM OF CRIMINALITY / DEATH / THREAT / STATE PROTECTION / MALE / SPOUSE / CHILDREN / NEGATIVE / MEXICO
1 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, 1993, 2 R.C.S. 689 to 725.
2 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, 1993, 2 R.C.S. 689 to 709.
3 Exhibit A-l: National Documentation Package - Mexico, June 29, 2009, Tab 1.3: The Europa World Year Book 2009. 2009. Mexico, pp. 3097-3127. London: Routledge.
4 Exhibit A-l: National Documentation Package - Mexico, June 29, 2009, Tab 7.3: MEX101376.E. June 6, 2006. Government efforts to combat corruption, including outcomes of investigations into incidences of corruption; efforts within the Office of the Attorney General of the Federal District (Procuraduria General de Justicia del Distrito Federal, PGJDF) to address corruption (2004 - 2006).
5 Ibid.
6 Camacho, Jane Egre Sonia v. M.C.I. (F.C. IMM-4300-06), Barnes, August 10, 2007, 2007 F.C. 830.
7 Martinez, Dunnia Patricia Suarez v. M.C.I. (F.C., IMM-7329-04), Phelan, July 29, 2005, 2005 F.C. 1050.
8 Judge, Gurwinder Kaur v. M.C.I. (F.C., No. IMM-5897-03), Snider, August 9, 2004, 2004 F.C. 1089;
Santiago, Graciela Ortiz v. M.C.I. (F.C., No. IMM-752-07), Frenette, February 25, 2008, 2008 F.C. 247.
---------------
---------------
---------------
---------------
RPD File No. / No de dossier de la SPR : MA8-08457
MA8-08460 MA8-08461 MA8-08476 MA8-08509
8
