E. F. v. Minister of Employment and Social Development
Collection
Other Canada Pension Plan (CPP)
Decision date
2017-10-19
Neutral citation
2016 SSTGDIS 85
Reference number
GP-14-248
Member
Susan Smith
Division
General Division
Decision
Appeal dismissed
Decision Content
On this page
Preliminary issues Introduction The law Issue Evidence Submissions Analysis Conclusion
Reasons and decision Preliminary issues [1] The Appellant contacted the Social Security Tribunal (Tribunal) by phone on October 8, 2014 to find out what she needed to complete her appeal. A return call was made on October 9, 2014. The Appellant stated that she had not received the letter notifying her that her appeal was incomplete and indicated her address was the same but her apartment number had changed from 1915 to 2208 at X X Drive.
[2] The Tribunal sent correspondence to the Appellant on August 11, 2015 that was returned to sender on September 4, 2015. The Tribunal pursued all available internal resources, including contacting the Respondent, to ascertain the Appellant’s correct address and phone number in September 2015 and followed all internal policies to re-establish contact but was unable to reach the Appellant at that time.
[3] On December 23, 2015 the Tribunal wrote to the Appellant informing her that the telephone number on record was incorrect and the Tribunal was unable to contact her. On January 27, 2016 the Tribunal received the letter marked moved/unknown- return to sender.
[4] On June 14, 2016, the Tribunal sent the Appellant a notice of intention to proceed on the record by Priority Post, which was returned unclaimed. The Tribunal again contacted the Respondent to ascertain if any updated information had been filed; it had not so the Tribunal again sent the notice of intention to proceed on the record to the Appellant by regular mail on July 20, 2016.
[5] The Tribunal is satisfied that all possible steps have been taken and all internal policies followed but the Tribunal has not been successful in re-establishing contact since receiving the first letter back marked as “return to sender” in September 2015. The Appellant has failed to comply with the requirements communicated to her that she keep the Tribunal informed as to her contact details and the Tribunal has determined it is appropriate in such circumstances to proceed on the record.
Introduction [6] The Appellant’s application for a Canada Pension Plan (CPP) disability pension was date stamped by the Respondent on October 11, 2012. The Respondent denied the application initially and upon reconsideration. The Appellant appealed the reconsideration decision to the Social Security Tribunal (Tribunal).
[7] The Appellant first came to Canada as a refugee on July 2, 1990 from Ghana. She was granted permanent resident status on the basis of information provided, including presentation of her passport, and her stated date of birth was accepted as November 7, 1957. The Appellant obtained a Social Insurance Number; a Canadian passport and social assistance between July 2, 1990 and October 11, 2012 with a recorded date of birth of November 7, 1957. On October 11, 2012 she applied for CPP retirement pension and stated her true date of birth was September 15, 1945. She indicated that she had taken steps in 2012 to have her official record of landing changed to reflect her true age. She presented no other evidence of any effort to set the recorded date of her birth straight during the lapse of 22 years from the date of her landing until the date of her application for CPP retirement benefits.
[8] Paragraph 3(1)(a) of the Social Security Tribunal Regulations (SST Regulations) states “[t]he Tribunal must conduct proceedings as informally and quickly as the circumstances and the considerations of fairness and natural justice permit.”
[9] Section 6 of the SST Regulations says that “a party must file with the Tribunal a notice of any change in their contact information without delay.”
[10] Given that the Tribunal has been unable to communicate with the Appellant for over one year despite the numerous attempts made to re-establish contact the appeal was decided on the basis of the documents and submissions filed for the following reasons:
The member has decided that a further hearing is not required. This method of proceeding respects the requirement under the Social Security Tribunal Regulations to proceed as informally and quickly as circumstances, fairness and natural justice permit.
The law [11] Paragraph 44(1)(a) of the CPP sets out the eligibility requirements for the CPP retirement pension. To qualify for a retirement pension, an applicant must have reached sixty years of age.
[12] Paragraph 89(1) of the CPP provides that the Governor in Council may make regulations prescribing the time, manner, and form of making applications for benefits, the information and evidence to be furnished in connection therewith and the procedures to be followed in dealing with and approving applications.
[13] Section 47 of the CPP Regulations states:
(1) Subject to sections 49 and 50, the Minister shall determine the age and identity of a person for the purposes of the Act in accordance with whichever of subsections (2) to (4) is applicable. (2) The Minister shall determine the age and identity of a person on the basis of any information provided to the Minister by the Canada Employment Insurance Commission under subsection 28.2(5) of the Department of Employment and Social Development Act. (3) The Minister shall determine the age and identity of a person on the basis of a birth certificate or a certified copy of one. (4) If there is sufficient reason to believe that a birth certificate is not available, the Minister shall determine the age and identity of a person on the basis of any other evidence and information with respect to the age and identity of the person that is available from any source. (5) If the Minister is unable to determine the age and identity of a person under any of subsections (2) to (4), the Minister shall, if it is possible to do so, determine the age and identity of the person on the basis of information obtained from Statistics Canada in accordance with section 87 of the Act.
[14] Section 49 of the CPP Regulations states that where the age of a person has been determined under the Old Age Security Act that determination shall be accepted by the Minister for the purposes of CPP.
[15] Section 52 of the CPP Regulations states that for the purposes of determining the eligibility of an applicant for a benefit, the applicant shall, in the application, or thereafter in writing when requested to do so by the Minister, set out or furnish the Minister with information or evidence of the date and place of birth of the beneficiary.
[16] Paragraph 104.1(1) of the CPP states that despite any other Act or law, any information obtained by a public officer of the Canada Revenue Agency, the Department of Finance, the Department of Public Works and Government Services or the Department of Citizenship and Immigration for the purpose of the administration of this Act may be made available to a public officer of the Department of Employment and Social Development, the Canada Revenue Agency, the Department of Finance, the Department of Public Works and Government Services, the Department of Citizenship and Immigration or the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions for the purpose of the administration of this Act.
[17] Subsection 28.1 of the Department of Employment and Social Development (DESD) Act states that every person who is employed in insurable employment must register with the Commission and the Commission shall maintain a register containing the names of persons required to register and any other information it determines necessary to accurately identify them.
[18] Subsection 28.2(5) of the Department of Employment and Social Development Act states that the Commission may make available any information contained in the registers maintained under this section and section 28.1 that the Commission considers necessary for the accurate identification of persons and for the effective use by those persons of Social Insurance Numbers to any persons that the Commission thinks appropriate to accomplish that purpose.
Issue [19] The issue under appeal is whether the Appellant qualifies for a CPP retirement pension.
[20] In this case, the Tribunal must decide if it is more likely than not that the Appellant’s date of birth is more than 12 years earlier than the date of birth she has identified from her date of landing as a permanent resident in 1990 until her application for benefits.
Evidence [21] The Appellant wrote to the Tribunal in December 2013 regarding her applications for CPP retirement and Old Age Security (OAS) benefits. She had applied for both on October 11, 2012. She indicated she had been denied her CPP benefit but had not received any response regarding her OAS application. She contacted the Tribunal under a mistaken belief it was the next step. Her appeal regarding her CPP benefit was later properly filed and determined by the Tribunal on October 19, 2015 to have been filed on time. She attached her application for CPP retirement pension dated October 11, 2012; her application for OAS pension dated October 11, 2012; and a Statutory Declaration sworn before a commissioner for oaths on October 12, 2012 (GD1-2-5). The Statutory Declaration indicated the following:
She was a Canadian Citizen; she had a Social Insurance Number (SIN); and a citizenship certificate issued on April 12, 1996. She came to Canada July 2, 1990 as a refugee from Ghana. She was born September 15, 1945 to Mr. K. D. and Madam S. O. in the X region of the X, presently, Ghana. She attended Onwe Primary and Middle Schools and completed in 1959 when she was issued a Middle School Leaving certificate. She was the second child of her parents and was named E. D. at her Baptism. She attended Tamale Teacher Training College and completed in July 1966. She worked for Ghana Ministry of Education: Konongo Methodist Primary School in Konongo- year- September 1967; K O Methodist Primary School in Kumasi- year- will advise; and New Suame Methodist School in Kumasi- year- will advise. She married G. F. who fled Ghana earlier on and sought refuge in Canada. She divorced G. F. in 1966 and he returned to Ghana. When her husband arrived in Canada it was his intention to sponsor a younger girl from Ghana as his wife. On her arrival, subsequently, he insisted, under threat of death and harm to her family in Ghana, that she adopt his second wife’s date of birth, which was November 7, 1957. She was physically and emotionally abused by G. F.; was completely dependent upon him; and suffers battered wife syndrome. She was on Social Assistance due to physical frailty caused by old age and was unable to work. She wished to apply for retirement pension and therefor needed to rectify the discrepancy in her date of birth and her age.
[22] The Appellant submitted a copy of her Canadian passport issued on February 5, 2007 with a date of expiration February 5, 2012, issued at North York. Her birth date was indicated as November 7, 1957 (GD1-9).
[23] The Appellant submitted a Middle School Leaving Certificate dated 1959 and stating E. D. has followed a course of Form Four studies at Onwe Methodist Middle School and passed the West African Examinations Council examinations in arithmetic, English, geography and history (GD1A-15).
[24] The Appellant submitted a letter dated April 2, 2014, from the Ghana National Teachers Association signed by the Senior Administration Assistant, E. A. The letter indicated that E. D. was born 15th of September, 1945 and attended Tamale Teachers Training College from September 1962 to July 1966, graduating with a Teacher’s certificate registration No. X. She was first posted to K.O. Methodist Primary School then transferred to New Suame Methodist Primary School, both in Ashanti, and she retired in 1990 having taught for 27 years (GD1A-16).
[25] The Appellant submitted a copy of her Ghana National Association of Teachers Membership Card with photo attached showing registration no. X (GD1A-17-18).
[26] The Appellant submitted a letter dated February 4, 2013 from the Ghana Education Services, Methodist Church Educational Services, signed by the Regional Manager of Schools Reverend M. B., who certified E. D. was born 15th September 1945 and was teacher at K.O. Methodist Primary School effective 1st September 1972 and she later was transferred to Suame Methodist Primary School and vacated her post in July 1990 (GD1A
[27] The Appellant submitted a letter dated May 29, 2013 from the Ghana Education Services, Methodist Church Educational Services, signed by the Regional Manager of Schools Reverend M. B., who certified E. D. was born 15th September 1945 and was teacher at K.O. Methodist Primary School effective 1st September 1968 and she later was transferred to Suame Methodist Primary School and vacated her post in July 1990 (GD1A-19).
[28] The Appellant submitted a Social Security & National Insurance Trust statement of account from Ghana, dated November 19, 2012, showing E. D., born September 15, 1945, was employed with the Methodist Education Unit and enrolled January 1, 1972 with contributions up to 1982 (GD2R-14-15).
[29] February 14, 2013, Citizenship and Immigration Canada, wrote to the Appellant stating they had completed their assessment of her request to amend her Record of Landing by correcting her date of birth from 1957/11/07 to 1945/09/15. Her request was denied because the documents she completed for her admission to Canada as a permanent resident were issued based on the information she provided at the time of her landing, including the passport she initially provided. They would only correct any errors in information that was recorded by them when a person first enters. They were not satisfied her information was incorrectly recorded or that any error was made therefor her request was refused (GD2-28).
[30] The Appellant’s Record of Earnings shows a valid SIN, a birth date of November 7, 1957 and contributions to CPP with a contributory period beginning in 1991. Her contributions for 1991 were returned due to below yearly minimum earnings. She had valid contributions in 1992, 1993, 1996, and 1999 (GD2-4).
[31] October 12, 2012, a Service Canada CSO completed a report following an interview with the Appellant when she submitted her applications for CPP and OAS. The report indicates that the in person officer who assisted the Appellant and interviewed her was compelled to make a report because the Appellant was accompanied by a male individual who identified himself as a church friend and the CSO felt that the accompanying individual was directing the Appellant’s answers and did not allow her to answer for herself. She was also alarmed that the accompanying male filled out the application, not he Appellant, and he insisted that the checks be sent to his address rather than the Appellant’s address. The CSO reported that in her opinion the Appellant appeared nervous and scared and looked to the accompanying male before answering any questions asked, including, he answered for her when she was asked to confirm she did not want her pension checks sent to her own address. When the Appellant was asked why her date of birth in her Citizenship document did match her date of birth in her application she appeared confused and was not able to answer before the accompanying male answered for her. She was not able to explain why she had not taken steps to change her birthdate in the past 22 years. The Appellant herself seemed to the CSO to not understand the questions being asked about her birth date. The accompanying male attempted to provide a statutory declaration he had prepared himself and which contained numerous errors corrected by crossing out information and which changes were not initialled. The CSO indicated she could not sign off on the statutory declaration as a commissioner (GD2R-43).
[32] December 14, 2012, the Appellant and her daughter appeared in person for an interview with an investigator and an interview record was generated. The Appellant said that she thinks her husband was born in 1948 and she said she was older than her husband by many years. She said her husband had come to Canada in 1988 and he filed the refugee papers with the birth date of a younger woman he was planning to bring as his wife but she had no interest in coming to Canada so her husband made her adopt the other woman’s birthdate. She said he left her in 1994 and went to the US and then to Ghana. During the interview the Appellant’s daughter stated that she had not seen her father in many years. She thought he was much older than her mother. She said she only learned of her mother’s true birthdate when she was in high school. She said they do not celebrate her mother’s birthday. The report indicates that the Appellant had a passport when she came to Canada but she said that she did not have a birth certificate and her husband had arranged for her passport to be made and she does not know how he got a passport without proof of her age. The Appellant’s daughter was born in March 1985 and the Appellant said she was 40 when her daughter was born. The Appellant said she was married in 1964 and she was thirty when she got married. She said it was common to try to have children first then marry in her country and she had several miscarriages before her daughter was born. She said that her mother married young and had a child every 3 years and she is the second child born. Her mother was still alive and well in Ghana. The Appellant stated that she was in grade 5 when she changed her name to E. D., a Christian name, and her birth name was T. A. The Appellant stated that she did not have her certificate from Teacher’s College because she had all her papers in a suitcase at home and she emptied the suitcase to give it to a niece to use and her papers all got lost. The Appellant stated that she had obtained her Form 4 certificate original, when she went to Ghana in 1995. During the interview the Appellant indicated she did not want her checks to be sent to the address of the person that filled out her application. She did not know that the same person was also collecting benefits at that address for another person (GD2R-51- 53).
[33] January 17, 2013, the Ministry of Community and Social Services, Toronto, responded to an inquiry from Integrity Services and indicated the Appellant was in their system and her birth date was November 7, 1957. In a telephone call on January 28, 2013, the investigator spoke with a case worker from the City of Toronto who reviewed the file notes and indicated that the Appellant in October 2007 had told the a case worker she was 62 years old (GD2R-33 & 60).
[34] The Social Insurance Registry investigation showed the Appellant first applied for a SIN in 1993 and obtained a replacement card in 2003 using her required proof of identity and birthdate of November 7, 1957 (GD2R-56).
Submissions [35] The Appellant submitted that she qualifies for a retirement pension because:
her true date of birth is September 15, 1945, and she is over 60 years of age; her Middle School Leaving Certificate issued in 1959 could not have been issued to her if she were born in 1957; her member ship in Ghana National Association of Teachers issued in 1966 could not have been issued to her if she were born in 1957; the letters she submitted form the Ghana Education Services showing her years of teaching confirm her date of birth as September 15, 1945; she tried to have her record of landing rectified to reflect her true birth date; he country of origin did not have a National Birth registry until 1965; in the absence of a birth certificate the evidence she has provided is sufficient proof of her true date of birth.
[36] The Respondent submitted that the Appellant does not qualify for a disability pension because:
Her date of birth record with the Social Insurance Registry shows her date of birth as November 7, 1957, and the Registry must be considered the primary source of validation; The next source of birth date is a birth certificate and only if there is no birth certificate can other information be considered; A thorough investigation conducted by Integrity Services did not disclose sufficient evidence to establish that September 15, 1945 is her true date of birth; The Appellant must apply to the Social Insurance Registry to have her birthdate changed if it is incorrectly recorded in the Registry; As the Appellant’s application was received more than twelve months before her earliest possible date of eligibility the application must be cancelled and her file closed.
Analysis [37] The Appellant has the onus of showing, on the balance of probability, that she is eligible to receive her CPP retirement pension. She must show that she attained the age of 60 years within twelve months of her application on October 11, 2012, or , in other words, she attained age 60 by October 31, 2013.
[38] The Tribunal has carefully reviewed and considered all of the evidence contained in the file. The Tribunal finds that the Appellant’s date of birth relied upon by her upon her entry to Canada in 1990 and granting of permanent resident status, and thereafter to obtain a SIN, Canadian Citizenship, a Canadian passport, and social assistance over a period of more than 22 years is credible evidence of her true birthdate and that only very compelling evidence to the contrary could result in a determination that her date of birth as recorded to date is not, in fact, her true birth date.
[39] The Tribunal does not find the documentation provided by the Appellant to be of sufficiently probative value to outweigh the preponderance of credible evidence generated over a span of two decades of applications made to government agencies for the Appellant to obtain her objectives. She did not speak up in 1993 when she applied for a SIN to change her date of birth. She did not speak up in 2003 when she applied to have her SIN replaced to change her date of birth. She did not speak up in 2007 when she obtained her Canadian passport to change her date of birth.
[40] The Appellant has argued that she suffers from battered wife syndrome and that is why she did not take steps earlier to rectify her records. The Tribunal does not find this explanation compelling. The Appellant has stated that her husband left her in 1994. She has stated that she traveled to Ghana in 1995. She has stated that during her travels to Ghana she obtained her original middle school certificate. She may have been successful in 1995, nearly 20 years sooner than following her application for benefits, in obtaining further information to support her claim had she been concerned that her birth date was incorrect at that time. She had to sign declarations of the truth of her statements and information submitted to obtain her SIN and her passport and declare she understood false or misleading information was considered perjury and is a punishable offence. She signed such declarations on at least three occasions, apparently without hesitation. Based on her evidence in statements to the investigator she knowingly relied on a falsely obtained passport and a false date of birth to obtain permanent resident status on her entry to Canada. Taking all of the above into account the Tribunal is not persuaded that the Appellant’s statement as to her identity can be relied upon. The Appellant has made conflicting statements that bring her credibility into question.
[41] The Tribunal finds that the many discrepancies in the information provided to the CSO in person interviewer at Service Canada, Integrity Services investigator and the Tribunal call into question whether the Appellant’s evidence regarding her maiden name can be relied upon. The Appellant swore a Statutory Declaration she submitted to the Tribunal indicating that her father’s last name was D. and her mother’s last name was O. and she was named E. D. at her baptism. She indicated on her applications for benefits that her last name at birth was D. She told the investigator that she changed her name from her birth name of T. A. to the Christian name of E. D. when she was in grade 5. This conflicting information casts a shadow of doubt over all of the evidence provided as the only tie to a birth date of September 15, 1945 is necessarily connected to the her true identity as E. D.
[42] The Respondent has argued that the documentation submitted by the Appellant is recent, within the last 10 years, and that the only document of any historical value does not make reference to a date of birth. In reviewing the documentation provided the Tribunal finds that the argument has merit. There are two letters, dated 3 months apart in 2013, from the Methodist Church Education Management both signed by the same individual and containing inconsistent information. The discrepancy in the two letters shows that the passage of time is an element that leads to incorrect information and it is a legitimate concern with respect to the documentation presented. While the Tribunal finds it unnecessary to go so far as to discredit the letters, the passage of time has been to the Appellant’s detriment.
[43] Where the evidence of date of birth is not sufficient for the Minister to be able to determine the age and identity of a person under any of the methods described in CPP Regulation 47(2) to 47(4), then the Minister shall, if it is possible to do so, determine the age and identity of the person on the basis of the information obtained from Statistics Canada in accordance with section 87 of the CPP. Furthermore, the subsection 28.2(5) of the DESD Act allows the Social Insurance Registry to share information with the Minister for the purposes of determining the age and identity of an applicant for benefits. The Tribunal finds that the evidence provided by the Appellant is not of sufficiently probative value to determine her claimed age and identity as true and refute the Appellant’s age and identity she has relied on for over 22 years.
[44] The Tribunal is not persuaded by the totality of the evidence presented that it is more likely than not the Appellant was born on September 15, 1945 and not on November 7, 1957. The Tribunal finds that the preponderance of credible evidence supports the Appellant’s true date of birth is November 7, 1957.
[45] The Tribunal finds that the evidence presented by the Appellant fails to meet the burden of proof in showing that she qualified for a CPP retirement pension by October 2013.
Conclusion [46] The appeal is dismissed.
